PTOCA-FM-001	Advanced Function Presentation Consortium Data Stream and Object Architectures
PTOCA-FM-002	Presentation Text Object Content Architecture Reference
PTOCA-FM-003	Note: Before using this information, read the information in "Notices".
PTOCA-FM-004	AFPC-0009-04 Fifth Edition (February 2025)
PTOCA-FM-005	This edition applies to the Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA). It is the second edition produced by the AFP Consortium™ (AFPC™) and replaces and makes obsolete the previous edition, AFPC-0009-03. This edition remains current until a new edition is published.
PTOCA-FM-006	Technical changes are indicated in green, with a green vertical bar to the left of the change. Editorial changes that have no technical significance are not noted. For a detailed list of changes, see "Summary of Changes".
PTOCA-FM-007	Internet Visit our home page: [www.afpconsortium.org](http://www.afpconsortium.org)
PTOCA-FM-008	This book describes the functions and services associated with the Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA) architecture.
PTOCA-FM-009	It is a reference, not a tutorial. It complements individual product publications, but does not describe product implementations of the architecture.
PTOCA-FM-010	This book is for systems programmers and other developers who develop or adapt a product or program to interoperate with other presentation products in an Advanced Function Presentation™ environment.
PTOCA-FM-011	The AFP Consortium is an international group bringing together voices from across the printing and presentation industry to keep the AFP™ architecture up to date and continually improving. AFP Consortium members, often market competitors, work together to ensure this stable, efficient, flexible architecture continues to thrive, even as the world of printing and presentation changes.
PTOCA-FM-012	The Advanced Function Presentation (AFP) architectures began as the strategic, general purpose document and information presentation architecture for the IBM® Corporation. The first specifications and products go back to 1984. Although all of the components of the architecture have grown over the years, the major concepts of object-driven structures, print integrity, resource management, and support for high print speeds were built in from the start.
PTOCA-FM-013	In the early twenty-first century, IBM saw the need to enable applications to create color output that is independent from the device used for printing and to preserve color consistency, quality, and fidelity of the printed material. This need resulted in the formation, in October 2004, of the AFP Color Consortium™ (AFPCC™). The goal was to extend the object architectures with support for full-color devices including support for comprehensive color management. The idea of doing this via a consortium consisting of the primary AFP architecture users was to build synergism with partners from across the relevant industries, such as hardware manufacturers that produce printers as well as software vendors of composition, workflow, viewer, and transform tools. Quickly more than 30 members came together in regular meetings and work group sessions to create the AFP Color Management Object Content Architecture™ (CMOCA™). A major milestone was reached by the AFP Color Consortium with the initial official release of the CMOCA specification in May 2006.
PTOCA-FM-014	Since the cooperation between the members of the AFP Color Consortium turned out to be very effective and valuable, it was decided to broaden the scope of the consortium efforts and IBM soon announced its plans to open up the complete scope of the AFP architecture to the consortium. In June 2007, IBM's role as founding member of the consortium was transferred to the InfoPrint® Solutions Company, an IBM/Ricoh® joint venture; currently Ricoh holds the founding member position. In February 2009, the consortium was incorporated under a new set of bylaws with tiered membership and shared governance resulting in the creation of a formal open standards body called the AFP Consortium (AFPC). Ownership of and responsibility for the AFP architectures was transferred at that time to the AFP Consortium.
PTOCA-FM-015	This book is divided into six chapters, three appendixes, and a glossary.
PTOCA-FM-016	Chapter 1, "A Presentation Architecture Perspective" introduces the AFP presentation architectures and positions Presentation Text Object Content Architecture as a strategic object content architecture.
PTOCA-FM-017	Chapter 2, "Introduction to PTOCA" briefly states the purpose and function of PTOCA.
PTOCA-FM-018	Chapter 3, "Overview of PTOCA" introduces the concepts that form the basis of PTOCA and provides a brief description of the data structures.
PTOCA-FM-019	Chapter 4, "Data Structures in PTOCA" provides the detailed syntax, semantics, and pragmatics of the data structures found in PTOCA.
PTOCA-FM-020	Chapter 5, "Exception Handling in PTOCA" describes how exceptions are handled in PTOCA and lists the exception codes.
PTOCA-FM-021	Chapter 6, "Compliance with PTOCA" describes how products may be valid generators or receivers of PTOCA.
PTOCA-FM-022	Appendix A, "MO:DCA Environment" describes the Presentation Text object in the context of a MO:DCA™ data stream.
PTOCA-FM-023	Appendix B, "IPDS Environment" describes the Presentation Text object in the context of an IPDS™ data stream.
PTOCA-FM-024	Appendix C, "PTOCA Retired Functions" describes the retired PTOCA functions.
PTOCA-FM-025	The "Glossary" defines some of the terms used within this book.
PTOCA-FM-026	Throughout this book, syntax is described using the structure defined below. Six basic data types are used in the syntax descriptions:
PTOCA-FM-027	CODE: Architected constant
PTOCA-FM-028	CHAR: Character string, which may consist of any code points
PTOCA-FM-029	BITS: Bit string
PTOCA-FM-030	UBIN: Unsigned binary
PTOCA-FM-031	SBIN: Signed binary
PTOCA-FM-032	UNDF: Undefined type
PTOCA-FM-033	Syntax for PTOCA is shown in tables like the following:
PTOCA-FM-034	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | The field's offset, data type, or both | Name of field if applicable | Range of valid values if applicable | Meaning or purpose of the data element
PTOCA-FM-035	M/O: M means mandatory. O means optional.
PTOCA-FM-036	Def: Y means that a default value is defined for the field. N means that there is no default value defined for the field.
PTOCA-FM-037	Ind: Y means that the field defaults to a hierarchical default value when the default indicator (X'F..F') is present. N means that the default indicator semantic is not valid for the field.
PTOCA-FM-038	The following is an example of PTOCA syntax for the Begin Line (BLN) control sequence as it appears in this book:
PTOCA-FM-039	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-FM-040	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-FM-041	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 2 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-FM-042	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'D8' – X'D9' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-FM-043	Please refer to "Control Sequence Detailed Descriptions" for a more detailed description of PTOCA syntax.
PTOCA-FM-044	Several other publications can help you understand the architecture concepts described in this book. The AFP Consortium publications and other AFP publications below are available on the AFP Consortium web site, [www.afpconsortium.org](http://www.afpconsortium.org).
PTOCA-FM-045	Table 1. AFP Consortium Architecture References
PTOCA-FM-046	| AFP Architecture Publication | Book Identification | | :--- | :--- | | AFP Programming Guide and Line Data Reference | AFPC-0010
PTOCA-FM-047	| | Bar Code Object Content Architecture™ Reference | AFPC-0005
PTOCA-FM-048	| | Color Management Object Content Architecture Reference | AFPC-0006
PTOCA-FM-049	| | Font Object Content Architecture Reference | AFPC-0007
PTOCA-FM-050	| | Graphics Object Content Architecture for Advanced Function Presentation Reference | AFPC-0008
PTOCA-FM-051	| | Image Object Content Architecture Reference | AFPC-0003
PTOCA-FM-052	| | Intelligent Printer Data Stream™ (IPDS) Reference | AFPC-0001
PTOCA-FM-053	| | Metadata Object Content Architecture Reference | AFPC-0013
PTOCA-FM-054	| | Mixed Object Document Content Architecture™ (MO:DCA) Reference | AFPC-0004
PTOCA-FM-055	| | Presentation Text Object Content Architecture Reference | AFPC-0009
PTOCA-FM-056	Table 2. Additional AFP Consortium Documentation
PTOCA-FM-057	| AFPC Publication | Book Identification | | :--- | :--- | | AFP Color Management Architecture™ (ACMA™) | G550–1046 (IBM)
PTOCA-FM-058	| | AFPC Company Abbreviation Registry | AFPC-0012
PTOCA-FM-059	| | AFPC Font Typeface Registry | AFPC-0016
PTOCA-FM-060	| | BCOCA™ Frequently Asked Questions | AFPC-0011
PTOCA-FM-061	| | Metadata Guide for AFP | AFPC-0018
PTOCA-FM-062	| | MO:DCA-L:The OS/2 PM Metafile (.met) Format | AFPC-0014
PTOCA-FM-063	| | Presentation Object Subsets for AFP | AFPC-0002
PTOCA-FM-064	| | Recommended IPDS Values for Object Container Versions | AFPC-0017
PTOCA-FM-065	Table 3. AFP Font-Related Documentation
PTOCA-FM-066	| Publication | Book Identification | | :--- | :--- | | Character Data Representation Architecture Reference and Registry | SC09-2190 (IBM)
PTOCA-FM-067	| | Font Summary for AFP Font Collection | S544-5633 (IBM)
PTOCA-FM-068	| | Using OpenType Fonts in an AFP System | G544-5876 (IBM)
PTOCA-FM-069	| | Technical Reference for Code Pages | S544-3802 (IBM)
PTOCA-FM-070	This fifth edition of the PTOCA Reference contains the following changes:
PTOCA-FM-071	Support for encrypted text data for secure printing and presentation
PTOCA-FM-072	Glossary entries were updated to the latest common level
PTOCA-FM-073	Small updates were made to correct errors and increase consistency and readability
PTOCA-FM-074	As stated in the edition notice, the additions are marked in this publication in green, with green revision bars located on the left-hand side of a page.
PTOCA-FM-075	<!-- Page 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 omitted as they were TOC or blank -->
PTOCA-1-001	This chapter provides a brief overview of Presentation Architecture.
PTOCA-1-002	Figure 1 shows today's presentation environment.
PTOCA-1-003	Figure 1. Presentation Environment. The environment is a coordinated set of services architected to meet the presentation needs of today's applications.
PTOCA-1-004	Document Creation Services: import/export, edit/revise, format, scan, transform
PTOCA-1-005	Document Archiving Services: store, retrieve, index, search, extract
PTOCA-1-006	Document Viewing Services: browse, navigate, search, clip, annotate, tag
PTOCA-1-007	Document Printing Services: print, submit, distribute, manage, print, finish
PTOCA-1-008	The ability to create, store, retrieve, view, and print data in presentation formats friendly to people is a key requirement in almost every application of computers and information processing. This requirement is becoming increasingly difficult to meet because of the number of applications, servers, and devices that must interoperate to satisfy today's presentation needs.
PTOCA-1-009	The solution is a presentation architecture base that is both robust and open ended, and easily adapted to accommodate the growing needs of the open system environment. AFP architectures provide that base by defining interchange formats for data streams and objects that enable applications, services, and devices to communicate with one another to perform presentation functions. These presentation functions might be part of an integrated system solution or they might be totally separated from one another in time and space. AFP architectures provide structures that support object-oriented models and client/server environments.
PTOCA-1-010	AFP architectures define interchange formats that are system independent and are independent of any particular format used for physically transmitting or storing data. Where appropriate, AFP architectures use industry and international standards, such as the ITU-TSS (formerly known as CCITT) facsimile standards for compressed image data.
PTOCA-1-011	AFP architectures provide the means for representing documents in a data format that is independent of the methods used to capture or create them. Documents can contain combinations of text, image, graphics, and bar code objects in presentation-system-independent and resolution-independent formats. Documents can contain fonts, overlays, and other resource objects required at presentation time to present the data properly. Finally, documents can contain resource objects, such as a document index and tagging elements supporting the search and navigation of document data, for a variety of application purposes.
PTOCA-1-012	The presentation architecture components are divided into two major categories: data streams and objects.
PTOCA-1-013	A data stream is a continuous ordered stream of data elements and objects conforming to a given format. Application programs can generate data streams destined for a presentation service, archive library, presentation device, or another application program. The strategic presentation data stream architectures are:
PTOCA-1-014	Mixed Object Document Content Architecture (MO:DCA)
PTOCA-1-015	Intelligent Printer Data Stream (IPDS) Architecture
PTOCA-1-016	The MO:DCA architecture defines the data stream used by applications to describe documents and object envelopes for interchange with other applications and application services. The MO:DCA format supports storing and retrieving documents in an archive, viewing, annotation, and printing of documents or parts of documents in local or distributed systems environments. Presentation fidelity is accommodated by including resource objects in the documents that reference them.
PTOCA-1-017	The IPDS architecture defines the data stream used by print server programs and device drivers to manage all-points-addressable page printing on a full spectrum of devices from low-end workstation and local area network-attached (LAN-attached) printers to high-speed, high-volume page printers for production jobs, shared printing, and mailroom applications. The same object content architectures carried in a MO:DCA data stream can be carried in an IPDS data stream to be interpreted and presented by microcode executing in printer hardware. The IPDS architecture defines bidirectional command protocols for query, resource management, and error recovery. The IPDS architecture also provides interfaces for document finishing operations provided by pre-processing and post-processing devices attached to IPDS printers.
PTOCA-1-018	Figure 2. Presentation Model. This diagram shows the major components in a presentation system and their use of data stream and object architectures.
PTOCA-1-019	MO:DCA to presentation servers
PTOCA-1-020	IPDS to printers and post processors
PTOCA-1-021	Resource Objects: Fonts, Overlays, Page Segments, Form Definition, Color Management Resources, Color Table, Document Index, Metadata
PTOCA-1-022	Data Objects: Text, Image, Graphics, Bar Codes, Object Containers, Other Objects
PTOCA-1-023	Documents can be made up of different kinds of data, such as text, graphics, image, and bar code. Object content architectures describe the structure and content of each type of data format that can exist in a document or appear in a data stream. Objects can be either data objects or resource objects.
PTOCA-1-024	A data object contains a single type of presentation data, that is, presentation text, vector graphics, raster image, or bar codes, and all of the controls required to present the data.
PTOCA-1-025	A resource object is a collection of presentation instructions and data. These objects are referenced by name in the presentation data stream and can be stored in system libraries so that multiple applications and the print server can use them.
PTOCA-1-026	All object content architectures (OCAs) are totally self-describing and independently defined. When multiple objects are composed on a page, they exist as peer objects that can be individually positioned and manipulated to meet the needs of the presentation application.
PTOCA-1-027	The AFPC-defined object content architectures are:
PTOCA-1-028	Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA): A data architecture for describing text objects that have been formatted for all-points-addressable presentations. Specifications of fonts, text color, and other visual attributes are included in the architecture definition.
PTOCA-1-029	Image Object Content Architecture (IOCA): A data architecture for describing resolution-independent image objects captured from a number of different sources. Specifications of recording formats, data compression, color, and grayscale encoding are included in the architecture definition.
PTOCA-1-030	Graphics Object Content Architecture for Advanced Function Presentation (AFP GOCA): A version of GOCA that is used in Advanced Function Presentation (AFP) environments. GOCA is a data architecture for describing vector graphics picture objects and line art drawings for a variety of applications. Specification of drawing primitives, such as lines, arcs, areas, and their visual attributes, are included in the architecture definition.
PTOCA-1-031	Bar Code Object Content Architecture (BCOCA): A data architecture for describing bar code objects, using a number of different symbologies. Specification of the data to be encoded and the symbology attributes to be used are included in the architecture definition.
PTOCA-1-032	Font Object Content Architecture (FOCA): A resource architecture for describing the structure and content of fonts referenced by presentation data objects in the document.
PTOCA-1-033	Color Management Object Content Architecture (CMOCA): A resource architecture used to carry the color management information required to render presentation data.
PTOCA-1-034	Metadata Object Content Architecture (MOCA): A resource architecture used to carry metadata in an AFP environment.
PTOCA-1-035	The MO:DCA and IPDS architectures also support data objects that are not defined by object content architectures. Examples of such objects are Tag Image File Format (TIFF), Encapsulated PostScript® (EPS), and Portable Document Format (PDF). Such objects can be carried in a MO:DCA envelope called an object container, or they can be referenced without being enveloped in MO:DCA structures.
PTOCA-1-036	In addition to object content architectures, the MO:DCA architecture defines envelope architectures for objects of common value in the presentation environment. Examples of these are Form Definition resource objects for managing the production of pages on the physical media, overlay resource objects that accommodate electronic storage of forms data, and index resource objects that support indexing and tagging of pages in a document.
PTOCA-1-037	Figure 3. Presentation Page. This is an example of a mixed-object page that can be composed in a presentation-system-independent MO:DCA format and printed on an IPDS printer.
PTOCA-1-038	Page Presentation Text Object(s)
PTOCA-1-039	Graphics Object
PTOCA-1-040	Image Object
PTOCA-1-041	Letterhead can be an overlay resource containing text, image, and graphics objects
PTOCA-1-042	Object areas can overlap
PTOCA-2-001	The Presentation Text object is the data object used in document processing environments for representing text which has been prepared for presentation. Text, as used here, means an ordered string of characters, such as graphic symbols, numbers, and letters, that are suitable for the specific purpose of representing coherent information. Text which has been prepared for presentation has been reduced to a primitive form through explicit specification of the characters and their placement in the presentation space. Control sequences which designate specific control functions may be embedded within the text. These functions extend the primitive form by applying specific characteristics to the text when it is presented. The collection of the graphic characters and control sequences is called Presentation Text, and the object that contains the Presentation Text is called the Presentation Text object.
PTOCA-2-002	Presentation Text is associated with the output of text information. A Presentation Text object is the description of Presentation text for a portion of a document, the intended connotation being finished product or formatted output. This output version of text contained within the object is in the form specified by Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA) and has been designed for direct output on devices, such as displays or printers.
PTOCA-2-003	A Presentation Text object is a device-independent, self-defining representation of a two-dimensional presentation space, called the Presentation Text object space, or object space, which contains the Presentation Text data. The rules of PTOCA specify how the object space is constituted, what the boundaries are for text positioning, what the text content is, and how the text content is to be placed within the object space, using concepts such as sequential order, orientation, and position.
PTOCA-2-004	Architecture Note: Note that when presentation text is processed in a MO:DCA environment where the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) is carried in the Active Environment Group (AEG) for the page, or when such text is processed in an IPDS environment, the Presentation Text object is bounded by the beginning of the page and the end of the page. This is sometimes called a text major environment. When the PTD is carried in the Object Environment Group (OEG) of a MO:DCA text object, the text object is bounded by the Begin Presentation Text (BPT) and End Presentation Text (EPT) structured fields. For such objects, the PTD in the AEG is ignored.
PTOCA-2-005	The Presentation Text object space is defined on the Xp, Yp coordinate system, which is an orthogonal coordinate system based on the fourth quadrant of a standard Cartesian coordinate system. The object space is positioned within the data stream's object area. Coincident with the Xp, Yp coordinate system is the I, Bcoordinate system, which is a translation of the Xp, Yp coordinate system.
PTOCA-2-006	The position of the elements in the object space is described in terms of the I, Bcoordinate system. The increasing I-axis is the inline direction, which is normally the reading direction of the text. The increasing B-axis is the baseline direction, which is normally the direction for adding lines of text.
PTOCA-2-007	The basic elements of the object are the graphic characters which are identified as code points of a code page. The identification of graphic characters, their relationship to each other, and the relationship of the code point to the graphic character are given by the coded font selected to present the text.
PTOCA-2-008	The relationship of the elements to the space they occupy is described in terms of their orientation, starting location, and units of measure.
PTOCA-2-009	The positioning of the graphic characters on a line is accomplished by moving the presentation position. Graphic characters may be placed adjacent to one another or positioned anywhere in the object space through the use of control sequences defined by PTOCA. Control sequences have been defined to move the presentation position to another position, to move to the beginning of another line, to adjust the distance between two adjacent characters, to draw lines such as rules, to adjust the distance between lines, to change the font, to specify the color of characters and rules, to overstrike a text field with a specified character, and to underscore a text field.
PTOCA-2-010	National Language Support (NLS) is handled in the level of formatting above the Presentation Text object. Font NLS support is provided in the font mapping function in the controlling environment.
PTOCA-3-001	This chapter: Summarizes the concepts that form the basis of PTOCA
PTOCA-3-002	Summarizes the data structures in PTOCA
PTOCA-3-003	The Presentation Text object is a description of text for a portion of a document that has been generated from one of many possible sources. Examples of possible sources are: Formatting from revisable text
PTOCA-3-004	Transformation from other data streams
PTOCA-3-005	Editor or formatting process
PTOCA-3-006	Direct generation process
PTOCA-3-007	Once created, the object can be presented, revised, or used in a resource such as an overlay. It occupies a given amount of space, the object space, and can be located and oriented in a physical area, the object area. The environment that carries the object is the provider of all external relationships for the object, including the object area.
PTOCA-3-008	The object space consists of an array or matrix of addressable positions which identify potential locations at which to place the basic elements of the object, graphic characters. Graphic characters are placed at addressable positions called the presentation positions, rotated relative to a baseline, and have the baseline of a group of characters undergo orientation to various angular positions, such as vertical presentation. These positioning functions are specified by control sequences which are carried along with the graphic characters. The initial positions or beginning values for many of the control sequences are described in a descriptor.
PTOCA-3-009	The Presentation Text object is designed to be carried by and become part of a data stream, called the controlling environment. The data stream defines rules by which the object can be carried. Further information about data streams can be found in Appendix A, "MO:DCA Environment" and Appendix B, "IPDS Environment".
PTOCA-3-010	The Presentation Text Data Descriptor carries the size, shape, and other special information about the object. The data stream is responsible for providing the proper information to the receiver, but PTOCA specifies a hierarchical method for determining the default values to be used by the receiver if the data stream does not supply the requisite information.
PTOCA-3-011	The Presentation Text data contains the code points that identify the graphic characters and the control sequences that specify where and how the graphic characters are to be positioned within the object space. The graphic character code points that represent text information can be specified in a Transparent Data (TRN), a Repeat String (RPS), or a Unicode Complex Text (UCT) control sequence, or they can be specified as free-standing code points that appear between control sequences. Graphic character code points can also be resolved to glyph IDs in a font. These glyph IDs are carried in Glyph Layout Control (GLC) chains for presentation.
PTOCA-3-012	Further information about PTOCA data structures is found under "Presentation Text Data" and "Presentation Text Data Descriptor".
PTOCA-3-013	The control sequences represent the functional capabilities provided by the Presentation Text object. Since receivers of the object might not all have equivalent capabilities, it is convenient to create subsets, also called subset levels, of the total function that is available. The base is a set of functions required in any environment, including the ability to interpret and validate the control sequences and parameters, and to detect and report exception conditions that are within the PTOCA subsets.
PTOCA-3-014	PT1: Includes a set of relatively primitive control sequences that a receiver is expected to support.
PTOCA-3-015	PT2: Includes all of the PT1 subset plus new control sequences for underscore, overstrike, superscripts and subscripts.
PTOCA-3-016	PT3: Includes all of the PT2 subset plus a new control sequence to enable spot (highlight) colors and process colors for text and rules.
PTOCA-3-017	PT4: Includes new control sequences to support the rendering of complex text.
PTOCA-3-018	The intent of subsets is to reduce the number of combinations of supported controls so that interchange between host processors is manageable. For further information about subsets, see Chapter 6, "Compliance with PTOCA", Appendix A, "MO:DCA Environment", and Appendix B, "IPDS Environment".
PTOCA-3-019	The Presentation Text object space defines the presentation space into which the presented text characters will fit. The object space is the matrix of addressable positions which are available to the generating process that defined it. This space has no relationship to the physical medium or printed page until it is placed in an object area by a composition process as part of the creation of a page or overlay. The Presentation Text object has no concept of pages, although the composition process may create an entire page from one object.
PTOCA-3-020	Positioning of the object space within the object area is accomplished by a mapping within the controlling environment. The object area is the boundary for text presentation by a receiver, and the controlling environment specifies the error recovery action that must occur if any portion of a character or rule violates the object area boundary. The object space is the boundary for the text positioned for presentation.
PTOCA-3-021	The Presentation Text object uses two orthogonal coordinate systems: 1. Xp, Yp coordinate system: Simulates the reader's view of the object space.
PTOCA-3-022	I, Bcoordinate system: Indicates the direction of the addition of characters to form words and lines, and the direction of the addition of subsequent lines.
PTOCA-3-023	The Xp, Yp coordinate is an orthogonal coordinate system based on the fourth quadrant of a standard Cartesian coordinate system. Both the Xp axis and the Yp axis specify positive values, which is a difference from the Cartesian system where the Y axis in the fourth quadrant specifies negative values. The origin of the coordinate system is in the upper left corner; the positive Xp-axis is from left-to-right, and the positive Yp-axis is from top-to-bottom. The frame of reference for the Xp, Yp coordinate system is provided by the environment's coordinate system for the object area into which the object space is placed. The location of the Xp, Yp coordinate system origin is specified as an offset from the object area's coordinate system origin.
PTOCA-3-024	The Xp, Yp coordinate system describes the boundary of the object space, which is a rectangle with sides equal to the extent along each axis. That is, the Xp-extent is the length along the Xp-axis, and the Yp-extent is the length along the Yp-axis. Thus the object space is bounded by a rectangle described by the following four coordinate pairs: Xp-origin, Yp-origin
PTOCA-3-025	Xp-extent, Yp-origin
PTOCA-3-026	Xp-extent, Yp-extent
PTOCA-3-027	Xp-origin, Yp-extent
PTOCA-3-028	The Xp, Yp coordinate system and the I, Bcoordinate system are closely related, as indicated in Figure 5. In fact, the Xp-extent is equal to one of the I, Bcoordinate extents, either the I-extent or the B-extent, and the Yp-extent is equal to the other. Therefore, the angle between the I-axis and B-axis will be identical to the angle between the Xp-axis and the Yp-axis. The Xp, Yp coordinate system describes the spatial viewport for the reader, while the I, Bcoordinate system describes the directions to be used for presentation and for interpretation by the reader of the graphic characters being presented.
PTOCA-3-029	Figure 4. Presentation Space Definition
PTOCA-3-030	The I, Bcoordinate system adds a concept of direction to the object space definition. The reader of text comprehends the text by assembling the characters into words or phrases. The direction in which the reader normally constructs the words or phrases is called the inline direction or I-direction. The inline direction for typical Latin-based text is left-to-right, but for languages such as Japanese, or tasks such as labeling graphs, the inline direction may be top-to-bottom or one of the other possible directions. Please see Figure 5.
PTOCA-3-031	Figure 5. I, B Coordinate System Examples
PTOCA-3-032	The inline direction is also the direction of increasing positive values of i along the I-axis, and prescribes the order in which succeeding characters are processed by a receiver. The maximum value of i is the I-extent.
PTOCA-3-033	All of the graphic characters placed in the inline direction for a given value of b constitute a line. The direction in which successive lines are placed for continued reading of the text is the baseline direction or B-direction. The baseline direction for typical Latin-based text is top-to-bottom, but for other languages, such as Japanese vertical writing, the baseline direction is from right-to-left. The baseline direction is also the direction of increasing positive values of b along the B-axis. The maximum value of b is the B-extent.
PTOCA-3-034	Although the controlling environment, as a carrier of the Presentation Text object, specifies the layout characteristics of the object presentation, the object, as a self-defining portion, provides the measurement units used by the generator in formatting the data. The Presentation Text object provides for both the English and metric systems of measurement. The measurement units for the object are specified in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor or determined by defaults. Measurement units can be specified so that the Xp-axis and the Yp-axis have different resolutions.
PTOCA-3-035	Measurement units are used throughout PTOCA to identify the units of measure to be used for such things as extents and offsets along the X and Y axes of a coordinate system.
PTOCA-3-036	Each individual measurement unit is specified as two separate values: Unit base: This value represents the length of the measurement base. It is specified as a one-byte coded value:
PTOCA-3-037	X'00': Ten inches
PTOCA-3-038	X'01': Ten centimeters
PTOCA-3-039	Units per unit base: This value represents the number of units in the measurement base. It is specified as a two-byte numeric value between 1 and 32,767.
PTOCA-3-040	The term units of measure is defined as the measurement base value divided by the value of the units per unit base.
PTOCA-3-041	For example, if the measurement base is 10 inches and the units per unit base value is 5,000, the units of measure are 10 inches / 5000 or one five-hundredth of an inch. Here are some additional examples:
PTOCA-3-042	| Units/inch | Comments | | :--- | :--- | | 1,440 X 1,440 units/inch | 14,400 divisions in 10 inches on both axes
PTOCA-3-043	| | 80 X 77 units/centimeter | 800 divisions in 10 centimeters on Xp and 770 divisions in 10 centimeters on Yp
PTOCA-3-044	The size of the object space is specified in measurement units. Each addressable position is one measurement unit away from another addressable position in any direction. That is, a specified measurement unit along the Xp-axis separates the addressable positions in the direction parallel to the Xp-axis, and another specified measurement unit along the Yp-axis separates the addressable positions in the direction parallel to the Yp-axis. This creates an array of addressable positions, each of which has the potential of being designated as the position of a graphic character.
PTOCA-3-045	The measurement units thus defined become the measurement units for all linear measurements within the object. The receivers must convert from these measurement units to measurement units for their environment as required, and keep track of rounding errors, making appropriate adjustments as needed to ensure presentation fidelity at a given level of capability.
PTOCA-3-046	The measurement units for angular dimensions are degrees.
PTOCA-3-047	When a PTOCA receiver detects a graphic character code point, the code point must be translated into a pattern of marks on some medium. A single-byte or multi-byte code point is used to identify the graphic character which is to be presented. Before presentation can take place, several attributes of the graphic character must be determined, such as the following: What character is represented by the code point?
PTOCA-3-048	Is the character valid?
PTOCA-3-049	What is the shape of the character?
PTOCA-3-050	The assignment of code points to characters is done by means of a code page or similar encoding structure such as a character map. A code page or character map can be envisioned as a table which contains pairs of values, where the first element of each pair is the code point and the second element is the identifier of the graphic character. The code page also defines the number of bytes required to represent a character, that is, bytes per code point.
PTOCA-3-051	For some font technologies such as the FOCA font technology, the validity of a character may be verified by referring to a graphic character set. A graphic character set is a set of letters, digits, punctuation marks, arithmetic operators, chemical symbols, or other symbols. If the character represented by the code point is not
PTOCA-3-052	contained in the graphic character set, then that character is invalid, and another graphic character must be substituted for it. The active coded font designates what graphic character should be substituted in its place.
PTOCA-3-053	The shape or graphic pattern of the character is determined from the related font. A font consists of an algorithm for presenting all the graphic characters that have a given style, size, weight and certain other characteristics. Here are examples: Style: Bodoni
PTOCA-3-054	Size: 10-point
PTOCA-3-055	Weight: bold
PTOCA-3-056	Other characteristics: italic
PTOCA-3-057	This algorithm could consist of a style manual, raster patterns, vector graphic command lists, stroke generation programs, engraved type, or other means of specifying the necessary attributes. The font also specifies the character increment or escapement, that is, the width of the character, and the character reference point or character origin, that is, the point within the graphic pattern which is to be aligned with the presentation position. Within a Presentation Text object, the desired characteristics are specified through a reference to a specific font. The coded font contains the encoding and the shape and metric information which are assigned to each graphic character. The presentation process applies the graphic character code points found within the Presentation Text object to the active coded font in order to determine the presentation characteristics of the characters. The font is managed as a font resource in the controlling environment. A Presentation Text object uses this resource by making reference to the coded font.
PTOCA-3-058	The structure and content of FOCA-based fonts is defined by the Font Object Content Architecture (FOCA), which is described in Font Object Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0007.
PTOCA-3-059	The structure and content of TrueType and OpenType fonts are described in the following documents available from the Microsoft® and Apple® web sites: OpenType Specification Version 1.4 (Microsoft Corporation: October 11, 2002), at http://www.microsoft.com/typography/otspec/default.htm
PTOCA-3-060	TrueType Reference Manual (Apple Computer, Inc.: December 18, 2002), at http://developer.apple.com/fonts/TrueType-Reference-Manual
PTOCA-3-061	Graphic characters are the basic elements of the Presentation Text object. The control sequences defined by PTOCA deal with the presentation of these graphic characters regarding either their positioning within the object, or some attribute of their presentation, such as color.
PTOCA-3-062	PTOCA assumes that the graphic characters are identified by one-byte or multi-byte code points that are defined within the encoding structure for a font. Each graphic character thus identified has a defined character reference point or character origin, a character increment or character escapement, and a character baseline that allows them to be correctly positioned along the baseline in the I-direction of the Presentation Text object. Please see Figure 6.
PTOCA-3-063	Figure 6. Horizontal Metrics: TrueType/OpenType Fonts and FOCA Fonts
PTOCA-3-064	The presentation of a graphic character is accomplished by placing the character reference point or character origin of the graphic character at the presentation position. The presentation position is an I, Bcoordinate pair, that is, an addressable position in the object space. The b value is fixed for the current baseline, Bc. The current i value, the new presentation position, is calculated from the previous i value by adding the character increment or character escapement of the graphic character being presented to the previous value of i, that is, the previous presentation position.
PTOCA-3-065	The presentation position in PTOCA designates a between-the-pels position on a presentation surface, not a pel centerline intersection position. The concept of between-the-pels positioning is especially important for the presentation of rules. Please see "Graphic Character Processing" for more information.
PTOCA-3-066	Object generators will determine which characters are to be placed on each line of the object. This does not require that the font be known at generation time in all cases. For fixed pitch fonts where the character increment is a constant value and for fonts utilizing standard metrics, it is possible for any font with the same metrics to be specified without modification to the relative positioning of the graphic characters.
PTOCA-3-067	Spacing between the characters can be modified by an adjustment, which is either an increment or a decrement on the character increment values provided for the graphic characters. In addition, the character increment specified for the space code point may be changed to a different value at any time to provide variation in the spacing between words.
PTOCA-3-068	Lines of graphic characters are ended by moving the presentation position to the beginning of the next line. This may be done using the positioning control sequences or through the use of a control sequence that causes the baseline increment value and the inline margin to set the presentation position to the next line.
PTOCA-3-069	PTOCA is intended to be precise enough to permit multiple products to reproduce the Presentation Text object faithfully. Faithful reproduction includes such aspects as the size and relative positions of graphic characters and strings of graphic characters. The responsibility for faithful reproduction belongs to the process that presents the object. PTOCA is also designed to permit less than faithful reproduction. It is possible to specify exception conditions for which continuation of processing is acceptable. This permits a process that cannot faithfully reproduce the object to continue with its best approximation. If less than faithful reproduction is acceptable for an application, interchange among a larger set of receivers is possible.
PTOCA-3-070	The Presentation Text object uses a control sequence to indicate that a function is to be performed. The control sequence consists of the Control Sequence Introducer and a list of parameters.
PTOCA-3-071	A Control Sequence Introducer contains the following fields: A one-byte prefix, X'2B'
PTOCA-3-072	A one-byte class, X'D3'
PTOCA-3-073	A one-byte length
PTOCA-3-074	A one-byte function type
PTOCA-3-075	Control sequences can be chained together using a chaining convention. Although the first control sequence in a chain has the prefix and class, the remaining chained control sequences do not. Chaining reduces the number of bytes to be handled and removes the need to determine whether the next character is a control sequence or not. Please see Table 4 for a list of PTOCA control sequences, showing both unchained and chained function types. Please see "Control Sequence Chaining" for more information about chaining.
PTOCA-3-076	Graphic characters may be grouped together as character strings to eliminate the necessity of checking for the Control Sequence Prefix. This capability is useful for creating strings of repeated characters. An example is the leader dots in a table of contents. The leader dot graphic character occurs only once per line in the object although it is repeated many times at presentation.
PTOCA-3-077	In addition this capability, when used in conjunction with chaining, allows the object to be described in terms of two parsing modes: control sequences and graphic characters. These two basic modes can then be optimized separately in an implementation.
PTOCA-3-078	Simple line graphic functions have been incorporated to satisfy requirements for figure enclosures, tables, boxes, line drawings, and so on. The capability includes vertical and horizontal rules which may have both the length and the width of the rules specified.
PTOCA-3-079	An ability to restrict the presentation of the graphic characters in a controlled way is provided by the suppression function. Suppression is accomplished by marking the text data to be suppressed and specifying
PTOCA-3-080	an identifier to allow grouping of the marked text data. All data marked with an active suppression identifier is prevented from being presented when the object is processed. The controlling environment specifies which suppression identifiers are active for the object.
PTOCA-3-081	Suppression can be used to create form letters that have portions of the form left blank, or filled in differently, depending on the intended audience of each instance of the letter.
PTOCA-3-082	There are times when it is desirable to place graphic characters in other than the customary upright reading position. For example, when labeling a graph, the graphic characters would be placed upright, but the line would be vertical; that is, the I-direction would be top-to-bottom. The I-direction and B-direction determine the orientation of the text, and an I-direction change is called a change of orientation. However, since the upright position is with respect to the I-axis, when reorientation occurs the characters appear to rotate at the same time. To create a vertical effect, such as in a graph, the graphic characters must also be rotated. Please see Figure 7. This figure illustrates changes in orientation with no change in character rotation.
PTOCA-3-083	Figure 7. Orientation Examples
PTOCA-3-084	Orientation is specified in degrees in a clockwise direction from the zero-degree starting point. The zero-degree starting point is the I-axis when the I-direction is left-to-right. A change in text orientation may also move the I, Borigin to a different corner of the text object space. Figure 7 shows the location of the I, Borigin for the 8 text orientations. The rotation of the characters is described in terms of angular movement of the character shape with respect to the character baseline, and is specified as part of the selection criteria for fonts.
PTOCA-3-085	Controls are provided in PTOCA to accomplish specialized functions. These functions include underscore, overstrike, superscript, and subscript.
PTOCA-3-086	This group of control sequences follows a modal concept in that, once started, the function does not terminate until stopped. Each control sequence marks the beginning or the ending of a text field for which the function is invoked. The same control sequence syntax with a non-zero parameter value begins the text field, and with a zero parameter value indicates the end of the field. All other control sequences are valid within these text fields without causing termination of the field.
PTOCA-3-087	Underscore is the capability of drawing a line under individual characters or groups of characters. Overstrike is the capability of filling a field with a specific character to provide a marked-out appearance.
PTOCA-3-088	The superscript and subscript functions require the ability to move temporarily from the designated baseline by small amounts. The superscript function requires movement in the negative B-direction, that is, above the baseline. The subscript function requires movement in the positive B-direction, that is, below the baseline. The amount of the incremental moves about the baseline is also variable. This allows a sophisticated implementation to provide a wide range of superscript and subscript capability, to be used, for example, when positioning the various parts of mathematical equations.
PTOCA-3-089	The Unicode standard recommends that text for all languages be stored in the order that it would be read or spoken, without regard to presentation order. With few exceptions, Latin, Cyrillic, and Greek scripts present text in the same order that data processing systems store the text. These exceptions are ligatures which are combinations of characters and accented characters. Traditionally, computer applications encode these combined characters using one encoding point and one graphic character. As an example, most systems encode Latin small ligature ff as one character.
PTOCA-3-090	Complex text languages provide different layouts for the presentation of text and its storage. Bi-directional (BIDI) languages present text normally from right to left; however, some text such as numbers and embedded Latin, Cyrillic, and Greek scripts, are written from left to right. These languages include Arabic, Urdu, Farsi, and Hebrew.
PTOCA-3-091	The following example nests Western and bi-directional scripts. Lowercase characters represent Western Script and uppercase characters represent a bi-directional script: Data Storage order: my address is SUITE B 100 YORK BLVD richmond hill
PTOCA-3-092	Presentation order: my address is DVLB KROY 100 B ETIUS richmond hill
PTOCA-3-093	Some languages require that characters be presented with different shapes or in a different order than their storage order. Arabic characters can be represented by one of four shapes depending on their position in a word. Arabic characters can also combine to form ligatures. In many south Asian languages, characters may need to be repositioned, reordered, or split, depending on adjacent characters.
PTOCA-3-094	Composition applications that need to present Complex Text will use layout engines such as International Components for Unicode (ICU), Windows® Uniscribe, Apple Advanced Typography, Pango, Scribe, or Graphite, to present text. Each engine has a different implementation. Outputs from the engines will differ somewhat. Some engines have better support for some language scripts than others.
PTOCA-3-095	PTOCA supports consistent text presentation through the Unicode Complex Text (UCT) control sequence and its complementary supporting glyph run control sequences. PTOCA presents text on a line-by-line basis. This means that applications must provide text boundary analysis. ICU provides iterators that support this type of analysis. These break iterators support determining character, word, line-break, and sentence boundaries. The Unicode Standard Annex #29 provides definitions for these boundaries. The ICU User Guide provides examples of boundary analysis. The Unicode BIDI algorithm works best on paragraphs, so the composition application should apply the algorithm before breaking the text into individual lines.
PTOCA-3-096	The ICU Layout Engine supports the presentation of complex text through a common client interface. This uniform base interface models a TrueType/OpenType font at a particular point size and device resolution. TrueType/OpenType fonts have the following characteristics: A font is a collection of images called glyphs. Each glyph in the font has a unique 16-bit id.
PTOCA-3-097	There is a mapping from Unicode code points to glyph ids. Some glyphs may not have a mapping.
PTOCA-3-098	There is a method to get the width of each glyph.
PTOCA-3-099	There is a method to get the position of a control point for each glyph
PTOCA-3-100	Client applications perform boundary analysis and determine text direction runs as necessary. They then call the layout engine to produce an array of glyph indices in display order, an array of x, y position pairs for each glyph, and optionally an array that maps each glyph back to the input text array.
PTOCA-3-101	The MO:DCA Presentation Text Data Descriptor and Presentation Text Data structured fields carry Presentation Text Objects in MO:DCA documents. The Presentation Text object space provides the coordinate system that allows object generators to position graphic characters and glyphs without error. It is the responsibility of the generator to ensure that it positions the graphic characters and glyphs correctly so that they do not exceed the object space.
PTOCA-3-102	The general approach composition applications will take to present complex text data is: If the data contains bi-directional scripts, use the Unicode BIDI algorithm to break the text into directional sequences. The Unicode BIDI algorithm works best with paragraphs, so it must be applied before text is broken into separate lines.
PTOCA-3-103	If multiple TrueType/OpenType fonts are used to present the text, composition applications must identify the individual font that will be used for each substring of text to which the layout engine is applied. This step should be performed prior to, or concurrent with, the script analysis that identifies the appropriate layout engine. The ICU Paragraph Layout API provides class interfaces to represent linked fonts with methods to request the individual font and the extent of the text string to be composed. If the entire Unicode text is not rendered with a single font, the subsequent steps must be repeated for each font and substring.
PTOCA-3-104	The application will need to determine where line breaks occur because PTOCA constrains text output sequences to individual lines. The appropriate position to break text can vary by language or script. The Unicode Standard Annex #29 provides definitions for character, word, line-break, and sentence boundaries. International Components for Unicode provides break iterators that support this type of analysis. The ICU User Guide provides examples of boundary analysis.
PTOCA-3-105	The application will use a layout engine to format text sequences. A text sequence is a run of text that use the same font (e.g. typeface with the same typographic attributes including weight, width, height, posture) where the text accumulates in the same direction. Layout engines normally return:
PTOCA-3-106	Arrays of glyph indices
PTOCA-3-107	Arrays of glyph positions
PTOCA-3-108	These arrays provide the information required to present the glyphs. The application will then normalize the positions with respect to the origin established for the current text object.
PTOCA-3-109	The application will obtain or calculate the Object Identifier (OID) value of the TrueType/OpenType font used to generate the glyph ID values. This value allows presentation devices to verify that they retrieve the glyphs from the exact same font that the application used. See the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004 for the definition of the algorithm used to calculate the OID of a TrueType/OpenType font.
PTOCA-3-110	The application will provide the full font name (FFN) of the TrueType/OpenType font used to generate the glyph ID values. This name provides a human-readable identification of the font and is also used to select a specific font in a font collection when the font OID identifies a collection.
PTOCA-3-111	Successful completion of these tasks will result in the application having the presentation data normalized so that it can create the GIR/GAR[/GOR] sequences and the preceding GLC control (the notation "[/GOR]" will be
PTOCA-3-112	used to indicate that the GOR is optional). This set of controls is called a GLC chain. The generator creates the following control sequences: A Glyph Layout Control (GLC) which identifies the start of the complex text position requirements sequence for this text run. The GLC specifies:
PTOCA-3-113	the advance along the current baseline caused by processing this GLC chain
PTOCA-3-114	the font OID to identify and validate the font used for the subsequent glyph run control sequences
PTOCA-3-115	the full font name of the font, which is used to select a specific font from a font collection when the font OID identifies a collection
PTOCA-3-116	One or more groups of:
PTOCA-3-117	a Glyph ID Run (GIR) which contains the glyph IDs for this text run
PTOCA-3-118	a Glyph Advance Run (GAR) which contains the advances in the inline direction for each glyph
PTOCA-3-119	an optional Glyph Offset Run (GOR) that provides the offsets of each glyph from the baseline. This control provides the ability to position glyphs such as diacritical marks and accents
PTOCA-3-120	An optional Unicode Complex Text (UCT) control sequence which contains the text encoded in UTF16-BE in data storage order. Use of the UCT is recommended as it provides applications the ability to interpret the sequence of glyphs rendered by the printer.
PTOCA-3-121	The maximum length of a PTOCA control sequence limits a single GIR to no more than 125 glyphs. This means that print applications must be prepared to generate multiple GIR/GAR[/GOR] groupings to support long Unicode encoded text strings.
PTOCA-3-122	If multiple fonts linked to the currently active font are used to render the text, a GLC chain must be generated for each substring that uses a different linked font. The presentation device will use the FONTOID parameter of the GLC to identify and validate the linked font used for the subsequent glyph run control sequences. If the FONTOID parameter identifies a font collection, the presentation device uses the FFONTNME parameter of the GLC to select the specific font from the collection.
PTOCA-3-123	In certain regulatory environments, such as the financial industry, there exists the need to protect customer information such as Personal Identification Numbers (PINs) and Transaction Authentication Numbers (TANs) until presentation time. Typically, this private information must be encrypted, meaning that the code points that make up the character string to be protected cannot appear in the data stream as directly readable code points. Using special algorithms, an encryption/decryption key can be used to turn the character code points into encrypted bytes.
PTOCA-3-124	At presentation time, these encrypted bytes can then be turned back into code points in a character string by applying the same encryption/decryption key to algorithmically convert them back into presentation text. To preserve the security of the data stream, the actual encryption/decryption key does not appear in the data stream; key information is passed instead. The decryption device has a lookup table to correlate the key information with the actual encryption/decryption key to be used for decryption.
PTOCA-3-125	PTOCA has the ability to identify encrypted bytes that represent this protected information. It also provides a means to set the key information for these encrypted bytes to facilitate decryption into code points in a character string at presentation time. If the decryption should fail, a mechanism is provided in PTOCA to substitute alternate text in the place where the decrypted code points were intended to go.
PTOCA-3-126	PTOCA defines exception condition codes that identify the various exception conditions that can arise during the processing of a Presentation Text object. These codes are provided for reference purposes only. PTOCA also specifies a standard action for each exception condition that indicates the recommended action a processor should take when it encounters the exception condition. The manner in which a PTOCA receiver processes exception conditions depends upon the controlling environment. For any PTOCA exception condition the controlling environment may provide its own identifier, which overrides the PTOCA exception condition code. The controlling environment also may provide its own action, which overrides the PTOCA standard action.
PTOCA-3-127	Presentation Text data contains the graphic characters and the control sequences necessary to position the characters within the object space. The data consists of: graphic characters to be presented
PTOCA-3-128	control sequences that position them
PTOCA-3-129	modal control sequences that adjust the positions by small amounts
PTOCA-3-130	other functions which cause the text output to be presented with differences in appearance
PTOCA-3-131	The graphic characters are expected to conform to a font representation so that they can be translated from the code point in the object data to the character in the font. The units of measure for linear displacements are derived from the Presentation Text Data Descriptor or from the hierarchical defaults.
PTOCA-3-132	The following pages contain summary descriptions of the PTOCA control sequences. Summary tables are provided following the descriptions. Please see "Control Sequence Detailed Descriptions" for detailed descriptions of syntax, semantics, and pragmatics.
PTOCA-3-133	Absolute Move Baseline (AMB) Establishes the baseline and the current presentation position at a new B-axis coordinate, Bcnew, which is a specified number of measurement units from the I-axis. There is no change to the current I-axis coordinate, Ic.
PTOCA-3-134	Absolute Move Inline (AMI) Establishes the current presentation position on the baseline at a new I-axis coordinate, Icnew, which is a specified number of measurement units from the B-axis. There is no change to the current B-axis coordinate, Bc.
PTOCA-3-135	Begin Line (BLN) Establishes the current presentation position on the baseline with the new I-axis coordinate, Icnew, equal to the inline margin, and the new B-axis coordinate, Bcnew, increased by the amount of the baseline increment from Bc. The baseline increment is established by the Set Baseline Increment control sequence.
PTOCA-3-136	Begin Suppression (BSU) Marks the beginning of a field of presentation text, identified by a local identifier (LID), which is not to be presented when the LID is activated in the controlling environment. This control sequence does not alter the effects of other control sequences within it, except that graphic characters and rules are not presented.
PTOCA-3-137	Suppression of presentation text by more than one control sequence at a time is not allowed; that is, nesting of suppression control sequences is not allowed.
PTOCA-3-138	Draw B-axis Rule (DBR) Draws a line of specified length and specified width in the B-direction from the current presentation position. The location of the current presentation position is unchanged.
PTOCA-3-139	Draw I-axis Rule (DIR) Draws a line of specified length and specified width in the I-direction from the current presentation position. The location of the current presentation position is unchanged.
PTOCA-3-140	Encrypted Data (ENC) Specifies a sequence of encrypted bytes that must be decrypted into a corresponding character string before standard text processing can be performed.
PTOCA-3-141	End Suppression (ESU) Marks the end of a field of presentation text, identified by a LID, which is not to be presented when the LID is activated by the controlling environment.
PTOCA-3-142	Glyph Advance Run (GAR) Specifies the displacement of glyphs along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-143	Glyph ID Run (GIR) Specifies the IDs of glyphs to be placed along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-144	Glyph Layout Control (GLC) Specifies control information for the start of one or more glyph runs along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-145	Glyph Offset Run (GOR) Specifies offsets of glyphs above or below the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-146	No Operation (NOP) Specifies a string of bytes that are to be ignored.
PTOCA-3-147	Overstrike (OVS) Specifies a text field that is to be overstruck with a specified graphic character. The overstrike function is initiated by an OVS control sequence with a non-zero bypass identifier, and is terminated by an OVS control sequence with a zero-value bypass identifier. The fields may not be nested or overlapped. The bypass identifier controls which portions of a line are to be overstruck; this provides for bypassing white space created by AMI, RMI, and space characters.
PTOCA-3-148	Relative Move Baseline (RMB) Establishes the presentation position on the baseline at a new B-axis coordinate, Bcnew, which is a specified number of measurement units from the current B-axis coordinate, Bc. There is no change to the current I-axis coordinate, Ic.
PTOCA-3-149	Relative Move Inline (RMI) Establishes the presentation position on the baseline at a new I-axis coordinate, Icnew, which is a specified number of measurement units from the current I-axis position, Ic. There is no change to the current B-axis coordinate, Bc.
PTOCA-3-150	Repeat String (RPS) Specifies a string of characters that are to be repeated until the number of bytes in the graphic characters presented is equal to a specified number of bytes. The string is not checked for control sequences. When the specified number of bytes is equal to the number of bytes in the characters in the data parameter, this control sequence is identical in function to the Transparent Data control sequence.
PTOCA-3-151	Set Baseline Increment (SBI) Specifies the value of the increment to be added to the B-axis coordinate of the current presentation position, Bc, when a Begin Line control sequence is processed.
PTOCA-3-152	Set Coded Font Local (SCFL) Specifies a LID to be used as an index into the font map of the controlling environment to determine which coded font, character rotation, and font modification parameters have been selected for use in the object.
PTOCA-3-153	Set Encrypted Alternate (SEA) Specifies the alternate text used (should the decryption fail) for all Encrypted Data (ENC) control sequences that follow.
PTOCA-3-154	Set Extended Text Color (SEC) Specifies a color value and defines the color space and encoding for that value. Supports spot (highlight) colors and process colors. The specified color value is applied to foreground areas of the text presentation space, that is, characters, rules, and underscores.
PTOCA-3-155	Set Inline Margin (SIM) Specifies the value to be used as the new I-axis coordinate, Icnew, of the new presentation position after a Begin Line control sequence is processed. The new presentation position is the addressable position nearest to the B-axis at which the character reference point of a graphic character may be placed.
PTOCA-3-156	Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA) Specifies the increment to be added to or subtracted from the I-axis coordinate of the current presentation position, Ic. The direction parameter indicates whether to add or subtract the increment. If the direction is positive, the increment is added; if negative, the increment is subtracted. This control sequence may be used to compress or expand words for emphasis, improved appearance, or justification.
PTOCA-3-157	Set Key Information (SKI) Specifies the encryption key information used to decrypt data for all Encrypted Data (ENC) control sequences that follow.
PTOCA-3-158	Set Text Color (STC) Specifies a named color value to be applied to foreground areas of the text presentation space, that is, characters, rules, and underscores. The values of the foreground color parameter serve as indexes into the color-value table found in Table 13.
PTOCA-3-159	Set Text Orientation (STO) Establishes the positive I-axis orientation as an angular displacement from the Xp-axis, determining the I-direction. This control sequence also establishes the positive B-axis orientation as an angular displacement from the Xp-axis, determining the B-direction.
PTOCA-3-160	The I-axis must be parallel to one of the Xp, Yp coordinate axes and the B-axis must be parallel to the other. The determination of the orientation and direction of the I-axis and B-axis places the origin of the I, Bcoordinate system at one of the corners of the rectangular object space.
PTOCA-3-161	Set Variable Space Character Increment (SVI) Specifies the increment to be used as the character increment for the character identified as the Variable Space Character by the font or by the controlling environment. This increment is added to the I-axis coordinate of the current presentation position, Ic, when the Variable Space Character code point is processed in order to establish the new presentation position. This has no effect on the B-axis coordinate value.
PTOCA-3-162	Temporary Baseline Move (TBM) Specifies a temporary movement of the current baseline away from the established baseline. The established baseline B-axis coordinate is maintained until a Temporary Baseline Move control sequence occurs. Temporary moves are made by the amount of the temporary baseline increment in one of three ways: Above: Direction parameter = 3
PTOCA-3-163	Below: Direction parameter = 2
PTOCA-3-164	Back to the established baseline: Direction parameter = 1
PTOCA-3-165	The temporary baseline function is terminated by a TBM control sequence which returns the temporary baseline to the same B-axis coordinate as that of the established baseline.
PTOCA-3-166	Transparent Data (TRN) Specifies a string of characters that are to be presented, but not checked for control sequences.
PTOCA-3-167	Underscore (USC) Specifies a text field that is to be underscored. The underscore function is initiated by an Underscore control sequence with a non-zero bypass identifier, and is terminated by a USC control sequence with a bypass identifier of zero. The fields may not be nested or overlapped. The bypass identifier controls which portions of a line are to be underscored; this provides for bypassing white space created by AMI, RMI, and space characters.
PTOCA-3-168	Unicode Complex Text (UCT) Identifies a sequence of Unicode code points that can be processed as Unicode complex text. The sequence starts with the first byte following the end of the UCT control sequence and ends with the last byte identified by the complex text length parameter in the control sequence. Rendering complex text involves bidirectional (bidi) layout processing and glyph processing.
PTOCA-3-169	Table 4. Summary of PTOCA Control Sequences
PTOCA-3-170	| Control Sequence Name | Unchained Function Type | Chained Function Type | | :--- | :---: | :---: | | Inline Controls
PTOCA-3-171	| | | | "Set Inline Margin (SIM)" | X'C0' | X'C1'
PTOCA-3-172	| | "Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA)" | X'C2' | X'C3'
PTOCA-3-173	| | "Set Variable Space Character Increment (SVI)" | X'C4' | X'C5'
PTOCA-3-174	| | "Absolute Move Inline (AMI)" | X'C6' | X'C7'
PTOCA-3-175	| | "Relative Move Inline (RMI)" | X'C8' | X'C9'
PTOCA-3-176	| | Baseline Controls
PTOCA-3-177	| | | | "Set Baseline Increment (SBI)" | X'D0' | X'D1'
PTOCA-3-178	| | "Absolute Move Baseline (AMB)" | X'D2' | X'D3'
PTOCA-3-179	| | "Relative Move Baseline (RMB)" | X'D4' | X'D5'
PTOCA-3-180	| | "Begin Line (BLN)" | X'D8' | X'D9'
PTOCA-3-181	| | "Set Text Orientation (STO)" | X'F6' | X'F7'
PTOCA-3-182	| | Controls for Data Strings
PTOCA-3-183	| | | | "Unicode Complex Text (UCT)" | X'6A' | —
PTOCA-3-184	| | "Glyph Layout Control (GLC)" | X'6D' | —
PTOCA-3-185	| | "Glyph ID Run (GIR)" | X'8B' | —
PTOCA-3-186	| | "Glyph Advance Run (GAR)" | X'8C' | X'8D'
PTOCA-3-187	| | "Glyph Offset Run (GOR)" | X'8E' | X'8F'
PTOCA-3-188	| | "Encrypted Data (ENC)" | X'98' | X'99'
PTOCA-3-189	| | "Set Encrypted Alternate (SEA)" | X'9C' | X'9D'
PTOCA-3-190	| | "Transparent Data (TRN)" | X'DA' | X'DB'
PTOCA-3-191	| | "Repeat String (RPS)" | X'EE' | X'EF'
PTOCA-3-192	| | "No Operation (NOP)" | X'F8' | X'F9'
PTOCA-3-193	| | Controls for Rules
PTOCA-3-194	| | | | "Draw I-axis Rule (DIR)" | X'E4' | X'E5'
PTOCA-3-195	| | "Draw B-axis Rule (DBR)" | X'E6' | X'E7'
PTOCA-3-196	| | Character Controls
PTOCA-3-197	| | | | "Set Text Color (STC)" | X'74' | X'75'
PTOCA-3-198	| | "Set Extended Text Color (SEC)" | X'80' | X'81'
PTOCA-3-199	Table 4 Summary of PTOCA Control Sequences (cont'd.)
PTOCA-3-200	| Control Sequence Name | Unchained Function Type | Chained Function Type | | :--- | :---: | :---: | | "Set Key Information (SKI)" | X'9A' | X'9B'
PTOCA-3-201	| | "Set Coded Font Local (SCFL)" | X'F0' | X'F1'
PTOCA-3-202	| | "Begin Suppression (BSU)" | X'F2' | X'F3'
PTOCA-3-203	| | "End Suppression (ESU)" | X'F4' | X'F5'
PTOCA-3-204	| | Field Controls
PTOCA-3-205	| | | | "Overstrike (OVS)" | X'72' | X'73'
PTOCA-3-206	| | "Underscore (USC)" | X'76' | X'77'
PTOCA-3-207	| | "Temporary Baseline Move (TBM)" | X'78' | X'79'
PTOCA-3-208	Table 5. Explanation of Symbols Used in Tables
PTOCA-3-209	| Symbol | Meaning | | :--- | :--- | | Ic | Current inline addressable position
PTOCA-3-210	| | Bc | Current baseline addressable position
PTOCA-3-211	| | Icnew | New current inline addressable position
PTOCA-3-212	| | Bcnew | New current baseline addressable position
PTOCA-3-213	| | Io | Inline addressable position at origin
PTOCA-3-214	| | Bo | Baseline addressable position at origin
PTOCA-3-215	| | Ih | Initial I-axis coordinate established by data stream
PTOCA-3-216	| | Bh | Initial B-axis coordinate established by data stream
PTOCA-3-217	| | Imargin | I-axis coordinate at left margin
PTOCA-3-218	| | Best | Established B-axis coordinate
PTOCA-3-219	| | CI | Character increment specified by font resource
PTOCA-3-220	| | ADJSTMNT | Intercharacter adjustment (increment or decrement)
PTOCA-3-221	| | VSI | Variable Space Character increment
PTOCA-3-222	| | CHAR | Any character with CI > 0 (non-null character)
PTOCA-3-223	| | NULLCHAR | Any character with CI = 0 (null character)
PTOCA-3-224	Table 6. Summary of Directive Control Sequences
PTOCA-3-225	| Control Sequence Name | Mnemonic | Parameter | Effect | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | Absolute Move Baseline | AMB | DSPLCMNT | Bcnew = Bo + DSPLCMNT
PTOCA-3-226	| | Absolute Move Inline | AMI | DSPLCMNT | Icnew = Io + DSPLCMNT
PTOCA-3-227	| | Begin Line | BLN | None | Icnew = Imargin, Bcnew = Bc + INCRMENT, Best = Best + INCRMENT
PTOCA-3-228	| | Begin Suppression | BSU | LID | Do not present text following this control through next ESU with same LID, if LID is active at controlling environment level.
PTOCA-3-229	| | Draw B-Axis Rule | DBR | RLENGTH, RWIDTH | Draw rule in B-direction from Bc to Bc + RLENGTH. Rule width = RWIDTH. Ic and Bc are unchanged.
PTOCA-3-230	| | Draw I-Axis Rule | DIR | RLENGTH, RWIDTH | Draw rule in I-direction from Ic to Ic + RLENGTH. Rule width = RWIDTH. Ic and Bc are unchanged.
PTOCA-3-231	| | Encrypted Data | ENC | ENCDATA | Encrypted bytes that must be decrypted into text characters for standard text processing.
PTOCA-3-232	| | End Suppression | ESU | LID | End suppression of characters if same LID as preceding BSU.
PTOCA-3-233	Table 6 Summary of Directive Control Sequences (cont'd.)
PTOCA-3-234	| Control Sequence Name | Mnemonic | Parameter | Effect | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | Glyph Advance Run | GAR | ADVANCE | Specifies the displacement of glyphs along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-235	| | Glyph ID Run | GIR | GLYPHID | Specifies the IDs of glyphs to be placed along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-236	| | Glyph Layout Control | GLC | IADVNCE, OIDLGTH, FFNLGTH, FONTOID, FFONTNME | Specifies control information for the start of one or more glyph runs along the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-237	| | Glyph Offset Run | GOR | OFFSET | Specifies offsets of glyphs above or below the current baseline.
PTOCA-3-238	| | No Operation | NOP | IGNDATA | Ignore bytes IGNDATA. No change to Ic or Bc.
PTOCA-3-239	| | Relative Move Baseline | RMB | INCRMENT | Bcnew = Bc + INCRMENT
PTOCA-3-240	| | Relative Move Inline | RMI | INCRMENT | Icnew = Ic + INCRMENT
PTOCA-3-241	| | Repeat String | RPS | RLENGTH, RPTDATA | Repeat RPTDATA until RLENGTH bytes from RPTDATA have been presented.
PTOCA-3-242	| | Transparent Data | TRN | TRNDATA | Process all code points in TRNDATA as characters.
PTOCA-3-243	| | Unicode Complex Text | UCT | UCTVERS, CTLNGTH, CTFLGS, BIDICT, GLYPHCT, ALTIPOS | Process the next CTLNGTH Unicode code points as complex text.
PTOCA-3-244	Table 7. Summary of Modal Control Sequences
PTOCA-3-245	| Control Sequence Name | Mnemonic | Parameter | Effect | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | Set Baseline Increment | SBI | INCRMENT | Upon execution of BLN, Bcnew = Bc + INCRMENT.
PTOCA-3-246	| | Set Coded Font Local | SCFL | LID | Establish active font, character rotation, and font modification parameters.
PTOCA-3-247	| | Set Encrypted Alternate | SEA | ALTTEXT | Sets the alternate text to be used if the decryption of encrypted bytes in the Encrypted Data (ENC) control sequences that follow should fail.
PTOCA-3-248	| | Set Extended Text Color | SEC | COLSPCE, COLSIZE1, COLSIZE2, COLSIZE3, COLSIZE4, COLVALUE | Set process color and highlight color for text, rules, and underscores.
PTOCA-3-249	Table 7 Summary of Modal Control Sequences (cont'd.)
PTOCA-3-250	| Control Sequence Name | Mnemonic | Parameter | Effect | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | Set Intercharacter Adjustment | SIA | ADJSTMNT, DIRCTION | If current character follows another character, Icnew = Ic +/- ADJSTMNT. Present character: Icnew = Ic + character increment. DIRCTION = 0 means ADJSTMNT is positive, DIRCTION = 1 means ADJSTMNT is negative.
PTOCA-3-251	| | Set Inline Margin | SIM | DSPLCMNT | Upon execution of BLN, Icnew = Io + DSPLCMNT = Imargin.
PTOCA-3-252	| | Set Key Information | SKI | KEYINFO | Sets the encryption key information used to decrypt data for all Encrypted Data (ENC) control sequences that follow.
PTOCA-3-253	| | Set Text Color | STC | FRGCOLOR | Set named color for text, rules, and underscores.
PTOCA-3-254	| | Set Text Orientation | STO | IORNTION, BORNTION | Establish angle of I-axis and B-axis with respect to Xp-axis.
PTOCA-3-255	| | Set Variable Space Character Increment | SVI | INCRMENT | Establish character increment of Variable Space Character.
PTOCA-3-256	Table 8. Summary of Field Control Sequences
PTOCA-3-257	| Control Sequence Name | Mnemonic | Parameter | Effect | | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | | Overstrike | OVS | BYPSIDEN, OVERCHAR | Overstrike following text with OVERCHAR. BYPSIDEN controls overstrike of white space. BYPSIDEN = 0 terminates. Baseline reference is Bc.
PTOCA-3-258	| | Underscore | USC | BYPSIDEN | Underscore following text. BYPSIDEN controls underscore of white space. BYPSIDEN = 0 terminates. Baseline reference is Best.
PTOCA-3-259	| | Temporary Baseline Move | TBM | DIRCTION, PRECSION, INCRMENT | Create temporary baseline at Bcnew = Bc + INCRMENT. Best is unchanged.
PTOCA-3-260	The Presentation Text Data Descriptor specifies the units of measure for the Presentation Text object space, the size of the Presentation Text object space, and the initial values for modal parameters, called initial text conditions. Initial values not provided are defaulted by the controlling environment or the receiving device. The Presentation Text Data Descriptor provides the following initial values: Unit base
PTOCA-3-261	Xp-units per unit base
PTOCA-3-262	Yp-units per unit base
PTOCA-3-263	Xp-extent of the presentation space
PTOCA-3-264	Yp-extent of the presentation space
PTOCA-3-265	Initial text conditions
PTOCA-3-266	The initial text conditions are values provided by the Presentation Text Data Descriptor to initialize the modal parameters of the control sequences. Modal control sequences typically are characterized by the word set in the name of the control sequence. Modal parameters are identified as such in their semantic descriptions.
PTOCA-3-267	The initial text conditions include the following parameters: Baseline increment
PTOCA-3-268	Extended text color
PTOCA-3-269	Coded font local ID
PTOCA-3-270	Initial baseline coordinate
PTOCA-3-271	Initial inline coordinate
PTOCA-3-272	Inline margin
PTOCA-3-273	Intercharacter adjustment
PTOCA-3-274	Text color
PTOCA-3-275	Text orientation
PTOCA-3-276	The following pages contain summary descriptions of the initial text conditions. Please refer to "Objects" for detailed descriptions of semantics and pragmatics. Also see the corresponding control sequence, if appropriate, for additional information.
PTOCA-3-277	Baseline Increment Specifies the value to be used for the increment parameter of the Set Baseline Increment control sequence. This increment represents the number of measurement units to be added to the B-axis coordinate of the current presentation position, Bc, when a Begin Line control sequence is processed. The current I-axis coordinate, Ic, is unchanged. The default value is the Default Baseline Increment associated with the default coded font of the device.
PTOCA-3-278	Coded Font Local ID Specifies the value to be used as the LID in the Set Coded Font Local control sequence. This LID represents an index into a font map of the controlling environment used in the determination of which font, character rotation, and font modification parameters have been selected for use in the object. The default value is the LID of the default font of the device.
PTOCA-3-279	Extended Text Color Specifies a foreground spot (highlight) color or process color to be used to present graphic characters, rules, and underscores.
PTOCA-3-280	Initial Baseline Coordinate Specifies the value of the current presentation position B-axis coordinate, Bc. This value represents the displacement in the B-direction from the I-axis for the initial position for presentation of graphic characters or processing of control sequences. The default value is device-dependent.
PTOCA-3-281	Initial Inline Coordinate Specifies the value of the current presentation position I-axis coordinate, Ic. This value represents the displacement in the I-direction from the B-axis for the initial position for presentation of graphic characters or processing of control sequences. The default value is zero.
PTOCA-3-282	Inline Margin Specifies the value to be used for the displacement parameter of the Set Inline Margin control sequence. This value represents the I-axis coordinate of the presentation position nearest to the B-axis after a Begin Line control sequence is processed. The default value is zero.
PTOCA-3-283	Intercharacter Adjustment Specifies the value to be used for the adjustment parameter of the Set Intercharacter Adjustment control sequence. This value represents the number of measurement units by which the I-axis coordinate of the current presentation position is adjusted when the SIA control sequence is processed. The direction of the adjustment is determined by the direction parameter. If the direction is positive, the adjustment is added; if negative, the adjustment is subtracted. The default value is zero for both the adjustment parameter and the direction parameter.
PTOCA-3-284	Text Color Specifies a foreground named color value to be used to present text, rules, and underscores. A foreground color parameter value represents an index into the color-value table in Table 13. The default value is X'FF07'.
PTOCA-3-285	Text Orientation Specifies the angular displacement values to be used for the I-axis orientation and the B-axis orientation parameters of the Set Text Orientation control sequence. The I-axis value represents the positive I-axis orientation as an angular displacement from the Xp-axis, and the resultant I-direction. The B-axis value represents the positive B-axis orientation as an angular displacement from the Xp-axis, and the resultant B-direction. The default value for the I-axis is X'0000', that is, zero degrees. The default value for the B-axis is X'2D00', that is, 90 degrees.
PTOCA-4-001	Chapter 4. Data Structures in PTOCA This chapter: Describes the role of parameters
PTOCA-4-002	Explains documentation conventions used in this chapter
PTOCA-4-003	Provides a detailed description of the control sequence
PTOCA-4-004	Explains how graphic characters are processed
PTOCA-4-005	Provides a detailed description of the Presentation Text data
PTOCA-4-006	Provides a detailed description of the Presentation Text Data Descriptor
PTOCA-4-007	Parameters and Parameter Values Kinds of Parameters: The control sequences used within the Presentation Text object may contain parameters that describe and control the way the control sequence affects the graphic characters to be presented. A parameter is a variable to which a value is assigned. A parameter has an architected length, a set of values, and a functional definition. These parameter values may be numeric, such as those that tell where text is to be presented, or logical, such as those that tell whether data should be suppressed. A parameter value can be the default indicator, specified by the value X'F...F'. The default indicator means that the effective hierarchical value is to be used instead of a value explicitly specified at this point. A parameter can be a reserved field. A reserved field has a prescribed value, but no functional definition. Reserved fields should be set to zero by PTOCA generators and should be ignored by receivers. A mandatory parameter appears in a control sequence because the function of that parameter is required and an actual value is necessary for proper performance. A mandatory parameter value may be the default indicator, provided that the parameter has an actual value somewhere in the hierarchy. Mandatory parameters must be supported by both PTOCA generators and receivers. In a sense, all parameters are required, since the value of each parameter must be known if it is to have an effect on presentation. However, some parameters are required only for specific types of presentation, and an actual value is not always necessary for some parameters. For example, a default value may be acceptable. An optional parameter need not appear in a control sequence. The function of that parameter may not be required, or if the function is required, a default value may be acceptable instead. An optional parameter may appear if the default value is not acceptable, if it is desirable to make a value explicit for documentation, or to avoid the effect of values specified externally to the Presentation Text object. Optional parameters must be supported by all PTOCA receivers. Hierarchy: Certain parameters, called external parameters, use the following hierarchical techniques in specification. If the parameter is not specified by individual control sequences in the Presentation Text object, that is, the parameter is omitted or the parameter is the default indicator, the parameter may be specified in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor. If it is not, the PTOCA default value is used. Not all parameters need to be set at all levels of the specification hierarchy. Table 9 identifies the valid hierarchical specification levels for the parameters, indicated by X in the associated column. Note that the hierarchy consists of the control sequence first, then the descriptor, and finally the PTOCA default value. Thus from a receiver's point of view, the primary source for a parameter value is a control sequence. If it is possible for a control sequence to provide the value, there will be an X in the control sequence column. If there is no control sequence to provide the needed value, or if the appropriate control sequence is present but specifies the default indicator, the descriptor becomes the source of the value. If it is possible for the descriptor to provide the value, there will be an X in the descriptor column. However, if the descriptor cannot provide the value, or if the descriptor specifies the default indicator, the PTOCA default value is used. Default values and Presentation Text Data Descriptor values are termed external parameter specifications, because these parameters need not be explicitly defined in the Presentation Text object. These values become current values each time presentation of a Presentation Text object begins.
PTOCA-4-008	Ranges of Values: Every value must fit within the field defined to contain it. Additional constraints on values are defined by the PTOCA subsets. See Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”, and the appendixes for further information about ranges. Negative numbers are expressed in twos-complement form. If a parameter is less than the minimum specified or more than the maximum specified, an exception condition exists. See the semantics of the affected control for the appropriate exception condition code. The maximum absolute value of a one-byte arithmetic value is 254 when the default indicator is valid. When the default indicator is specifically excepted, the one-byte maximum arithmetic value is 255. One-byte values are always unsigned. The maximum absolute value of a signed two-byte arithmetic value is 32,768. The maximum absolute value of an unsigned two-byte arithmetic value is 65,534 when the default indicator is valid, and 65,535 when the default indicator is not valid. The minimum requirements of PTOCA for receivers regarding range is to provide calculation capacity equal in size to the number of bits in the respective parameters. This is limited by the subset. Processing of the Presentation Text object necessitates tracking the current positions within the object space. In addition, PTOCA requires that receivers be capable of tracking the current positions outside of the object space as long as presentation is not attempted. The following example illustrates the intent of this concept for $Ic$ . A receiver may determine the maximum
PTOCA-4-009	number of bits for $Ic$ based on the physical size and resolution of the mechanism. For example, the receiver may base it on a carriage width of three inches and a resolution of 1/1440 inch. For this receiver, positioning outside the object space could be handled in the cases where the object space is smaller than the carriage width. But when the object space is equal to or greater than the carriage width, the receiver's calculation capacity may not be large enough to contain the calculations outside the object space, and the results may be unpredictable. Such overflow is not considered to be an exception condition by PTOCA. However, the architectural recommendation to generators is to avoid addressable positions that are outside of the object space. Parameter Data Types: Every parameter value is one of the following data types: A bit string (BITS) is a string of bits one or more bytes long. Each bit has the value B'1' or B'0'. A code (CODE) is a constant for which PTOCA defines a particular meaning. A number is an unsigned (UBIN) or signed (SBIN) arithmetic value that implies count or magnitude. A character string (CHAR) is one or more bytes of character information. An undefined field (UNDF) is a field that is not defined by PTOCA. In all cases bytes are composed of eight bits, called bits 0 - 7. Bit 0 is in the high-order position; that is, bit 0 = 2 7 and bit 7 = 2 0 . Two bytes considered together are sixteen bits, called bits 0 - 15. Bit 0 is in the high-order
PTOCA-4-010	position; that is, bit 0 = 2 15. and bit 15 = 2 0 . The first byte received is the high-order byte, that is, bits 0 - 7. The
PTOCA-4-011	second byte is the low-order byte, that is, bits 8 - 15. This is called big-endian bit order and big-endian byte order. Different syntax is used for the expression of values that pertain to rotation. The Default Indicator: For certain parameters, the value X'F...F' represents the default indicator. For these parameters, the arithmetic value -1 is not available. The default indicator does not specify a value for a parameter and, therefore, maintains a default value for that parameter. This indicator specifies that the default value be obtained from the hierarchy, not including previous instances of the same parameter in the current object. The syntax of each control sequence specifies whether the default indicator is valid for its parameters. In general, the default value for an omitted optional trailing parameter is obtained from previous instances of the same parameter in the current object according to the hierarchy.
PTOCA-4-012	Table 9. Parameter Specification Hierarchy
PTOCA-4-013	| Parameter | Set by Control Sequence (highest priority) | Set by Descriptor | PTOCA Default Value (lowest priority) | |:--- |:---: |:---: |:--- | | Measurement Units | | X | Receiver dependent
PTOCA-4-014	| | Size | | X | Receiver dependent
PTOCA-4-015	| | Baseline Increment | X | X | Receiver dependent, should be based on the coded font
PTOCA-4-016	| | Suppression identifier | | | None
PTOCA-4-017	| | Coded Font Local ID | X | X | Receiver dependent
PTOCA-4-018	| | Intercharacter Adjustment | X | X | 0
PTOCA-4-019	| | Intercharacter Direction | X | X | 0
PTOCA-4-020	| | Inline Margin | X | X | 0
PTOCA-4-021	| | Initial Baseline Coordinate | | X | Receiver dependent
PTOCA-4-022	| | Initial Inline Coordinate | | X | 0
PTOCA-4-023	| | Foreground Color | X | X | X'FF07'
PTOCA-4-024	| | Text Orientation | X | X | 0,90
PTOCA-4-025	| | Rule Length | X | | None
PTOCA-4-026	| | Rule Width | X | | Receiver dependent
PTOCA-4-027	| | Overstrike Bypass Identifiers | X | | X'01'
PTOCA-4-028	| | Overstrike Character | X | | Coded font dependent
PTOCA-4-029	| | Temporary Baseline Increment | X | | ½ the Baseline Increment
PTOCA-4-030	| | Temporary Baseline Direction | X | | 0
PTOCA-4-031	| | Temporary Baseline Precision | X | | 0
PTOCA-4-032	| | Underscore Bypass Identifiers | X | | X'01'
PTOCA-4-033	| | Variable Space Character Code | | | Coded font dependent
PTOCA-4-034	| | Variable Space Character Increment | X | | Coded font dependent
PTOCA-4-035	| | Alternate Text | X | | None
PTOCA-4-036	| | Key Information | X | | None
PTOCA-4-037	| Key Information X None
PTOCA-4-038	Control Sequence The Presentation Text object can specify that text functions are to be performed, such as underlining, margin setting, or justification. These functions are invoked by sequences that must begin with identifiers that distinguish them from code points. A character that delimits a string that must be processed in a different manner may be thought of as an escape character. In the Presentation Text object, the equivalent of an escape character is the Control Sequence Prefix. The string it delimits is a control sequence. The Presentation Text object supports only one type of control sequence.
PTOCA-4-039	Control Sequence Format A control sequence contains a Control Sequence Introducer followed by parameters. The parameter portion of the control sequence may be from 0 to 253 bytes in length. Introducer Parm 1 Parm 2 Parm 3 ... Parm n An unchained Control Sequence Introducer contains the following fields: A one-byte prefix, X'2B'
PTOCA-4-040	A one-byte class, X'D3'
PTOCA-4-041	A one-byte length
PTOCA-4-042	A one-byte function type
PTOCA-4-043	Prefix Class Length Function Type X'2B' X'D3' The length field delimits the control sequence by indicating the last byte in the control sequence. The length field specifies the count of bytes in the control sequence, starting with itself. If the value of the length field is 2, there are no parameters in the control sequence. If the value is 3 or greater, there are parameters. The function type uniquely identifies a control sequence, defines its syntax, and determines its semantics. The number of parameters and the number of bytes in each parameter are implicit in the function type definition. A chained Control Sequence Introducer contains the following fields: A one-byte length
PTOCA-4-044	A one-byte function type
PTOCA-4-045	Length Function Type Thus a Control Sequence Introducer is either two bytes or four bytes in length, depending on whether it is chained or unchained.
PTOCA-4-046	control sequence has a function type with the low-order bit equal to B'0', the string which follows the control sequence may be code points or an unchained control sequence. Note: In some environments, terminating a chain by ending the Presentation Text object might cause problems, therefore it is recommended that generators always terminate chains with a control sequence whose low-order bit is B'0'. Chains of control sequences may be as long as desired. Control sequences in a chain are interpreted in the order in which they are encountered. Table 4 lists the control sequences that can appear within Presentation Text data and their function types, both unchained and chained.
PTOCA-4-047	Modal Control Sequences Certain control sequences are modal. That is, they establish a parameter value that persists after the control sequence has been processed. An example is Set Inline Margin, which sets the size of the inline margin. When such a control sequence is processed, its parameter value replaces the existing parameter value. The existing parameter value may have been set in one of the following ways: A previous modal control sequence in the current Presentation Text object
PTOCA-4-048	Externally to the Presentation Text object
PTOCA-4-049	By default
PTOCA-4-050	Application Note: When the Begin Presentation Text (BPT) structured field is encountered in a MO:DCA data stream, all initial text conditions specified in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) structured field are set prior to processing the text object. In addition, in AFP environments, whenever a BPT is encountered, AFP presentation servers set the following default page-level initial text conditions before the PTD initial conditions are set: Parameter Value Initial (I,B) Presentation Position (0,0) Text Orientation 0°,90° Coded Font Local ID X'FF' (default font) Baseline Increment 6 lpi Inline Margin 0 Intercharacter Adjustment 0 Text Color X'FFFF' (default color) Application Note: The PTD also specifies the size of the text object space. When the PTD is specified in the AEG of a MO:DCA page in a text major environment, the extents of the text object space are set equal to the extents of the page. When the PTD is specified in the OEG of a MO:DCA text object, the extents of the text object space can be set to any value in the allowed range.
PTOCA-4-051	Control Sequence Default Indicator The default indicator (X'F..F') in a parameter of a control sequence causes the parameter to use the hierarchical default value for that parameter. The hierarchical default values are listed in Table 9.
PTOCA-4-052	Control Sequence Introducer The Control Sequence Introducer is a two-byte or four-byte field, depending on whether the control sequence is unchained or chained. Syntax: A Control Sequence Introducer can appear only at the beginning of a control sequence. Syntax: A Control Sequence Introducer can appear only at the beginning of a control sequence.
PTOCA-4-053	An unchained Control Sequence Introducer has the following format:
PTOCA-4-054	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-055	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-056	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 2–255 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-057	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'00' – X'FE' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-058	A chained Control Sequence Introducer has the following format:
PTOCA-4-059	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | UBIN | LENGTH | 2–255 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-060	| | 1 | CODE | TYPE | X'00' – X'FE' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-061	Semantics: A Control Sequence Introducer begins, specifies the length of, and identifies the type of a control sequence. It suspends the processing of text and begins the processing of control sequences. Pragmatics: A Control Sequence Introducer immediately precedes the data portion of a control sequence.
PTOCA-4-062	Control Sequence Prefix The Control Sequence Prefix marks the beginning of an unchained control sequence. This parameter causes a change in the mode of interpretation of a presentation text stream. When a Control Sequence Prefix is encountered, the bytes immediately following are interpreted as a control sequence rather than as code points. This mode of interpretation continues until the control sequence or control sequence chain is terminated.
PTOCA-4-063	Control Sequence Class The control sequence class characterizes the syntax of the Control Sequence Introducer. This parameter specifies how the introducer of the current control sequence should be interpreted. X'D3' has been assigned for PTOCA. If any other class is encountered, exception condition EC-1C01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence.
PTOCA-4-064	Control Sequence Length The control sequence length specifies the length of the control sequence beginning with and including itself. The prefix and class are not included in the length. If the length parameter, as specified for individual control sequences, is invalid, exception condition EC-1E01 exists: If a mandatory parameter is missing from the control sequence, the standard action is to ignore the control
PTOCA-4-065	sequence. If the control sequence is longer than specified, the standard action is to ignore only the undefined
PTOCA-4-066	Graphic Character Processing Format: The format of the graphic characters is specified by the active coded font. The coded font is specified by an external reference to a coded font resource by specification of a coded font local identifier. The coded font determines the length of the code point used to specify each graphic character, and the assignment of a code point to each graphic character. If a character is contained in the Presentation Text object that is not defined in the active coded font, exception condition EC-2100 exists. The standard action is to present the default character defined by the active coded font. Please see “Font Concepts” for more information on fonts. Presentation: Graphic character processing uses the I, B coordinate system. $Ic$ and $Bc$ represent the I and B coordinates of the current presentation position. $Io$ and $Bo$ represent the origin of the I, B coordinate system. Please refer to Table 10, Figure 8, and Figure 9. Upon entry into the Presentation Text object, $Ic$ and $Bc$ are initialized to the values specified at the data stream level. If values are not specified by the controlling environment, these coordinates are set to their standard action values; that is, $Ic$ = $Io$ = 0 and $Bc$ = $Bo$ = 0. See “Enter Object” in Table 10. After the object has been entered, the values of $Ic$ and $Bc$ may be changed before the first character is presented, either by parameters in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor or by control sequences in the Presentation Text data. Each graphic character in a string of Presentation Text data normally causes a character shape, as defined in the active font resource, to be placed on the presentation surface. The character's reference point coincides with the presentation position, $Ic$ ,$Bc$ , and the character baseline is made parallel to the baseline by rotation. Simultaneously, the $Ic$ coordinate of the current presentation position is increased by the character increment specified for that character in the active coded font. See “Present character, general case” in Table 10 on page 42. If a character is to be placed immediately following another character on the presentation surface, the $Ic$ coordinate is first increased or decreased by the intercharacter adjustment. See “Present character, specific cases” in Table 10. Then the character shape is placed with the character reference point coincident with this revised presentation position. Last, the current presentation position is incremented by the addition of the character increment value. As each graphic character is placed, the current presentation position is moved in the positive inline direction. The concept of between-the-pels positioning on a presentation surface is important for the presentation of rules. For inline rules, please see Figure 10. Use one of the four diagrams, depending upon the rule length and rule width values. When presentation is to begin for an inline rule, the physical pels are located as shown. I and B are not directly represented in the diagrams, since the diagrams are intended to provide the approximate location of the pels to be presented for inline rules. The I and B refer to direction only. For example, if the I-axis is vertical and the I-direction is down as a result of an orientation change, an inline rule of positive length and positive width would still be positioned as in diagram (b). For baseline rules, please see Figure 11. Use one of the four diagrams, depending upon the rule length and rule width values. When presentation is to begin for a baseline rule, the physical pels are located as shown. I and B are not directly represented in the diagrams, since the diagrams are intended to provide the approximate location of the pels to be presented for baseline rules. The I and B refer to direction only. For example, if the B-axis is horizontal and the B-direction is to the left as a result of an orientation change, a baseline rule of positive length and positive width would still be positioned as in diagram (b). Overrun: If the intercharacter adjustment is zero, n characters, each having a fixed character increment of CI, may be printed in a presentation space whose I-extent is n times CI. For example, if n is 100 characters and CI is 0.1 inch, that is, 10-pitch, all 100 characters will fit on a logical page with an I-extent of 10 inches. In this case, the 100th character just fits within the presentation space. Following placement of the 100th character, the current inline coordinate position, $Ic$ , is one measurement unit beyond the I-extent.
PTOCA-4-067	If an attempt is made to present any portion of a character's character box or any portion of a rule beyond the I- extent, exception condition EC-0103 exists. If the presented character is defined in terms of A-space, B-space, and C-space, only the B-space is considered part of the character box. The standard action for this exception condition is to refrain from presenting the character whose character box is outside the object space boundary, and to continue processing without presenting characters. Processing continues until the presentation position is moved to an addressable point that is valid. This exception condition exists regardless of the graphic character causing the condition. For example, if the graphic character is a blank or a variable space character, the exception condition exists even though no marks are made on the presentation surface. This exception condition ceases to exist when an intercharacter adjustment causes the presented character to move into the object space. The exception condition exists if an intercharacter adjustment causes any part of the character box of the presented character to move out of the object space. Throughout this process the current baseline coordinate, $Bc$ , remains unchanged. The minimum calculation capacity for overrun handling is equal to the number of bytes that constitutes the parameter. Thus a two-byte parameter requires a minimum of two bytes of storage. Control sequences are processed according to their semantics without regard to the presence of an overrun. Consider the following example. Assume that the presentation position is $Io$ , $Bo$ , that is, the upper left corner of the presentation space, and that the character reference point of the character to be presented is the lower left corner of its character box. In this case, an exception condition exists even though the presentation position is within the object space, because some of the character shape extends outside of the object space. Invoking the standard action causes additional character increments to be applied repeatedly, and each character is outside of the object space. In effect, each character received is rejected until a control sequence is received that moves the baseline away from the I-axis, such as Begin Line or Absolute Move Baseline. Superscripting and Subscripting: Superscripts and subscripts are graphic characters that appear above or below adjacent graphic characters on the same line, and may be smaller than adjacent graphic characters on the same line. They have special purposes, such as representing exponents or footnote numbers. Superscripts and subscripts may be implemented in different ways. A font may contain smaller graphic characters which are designed to appear as superscripts or subscripts.
PTOCA-4-068	These characters may be designed with their character base above, on, or below the nominal baseline. With a font like this, superscripting or subscripting is implicit in presenting one of these graphic characters. A font may consist entirely of graphic characters which are designed so that they will appear as superscripts
PTOCA-4-069	or subscripts when used with other fonts. With a font like this, superscripting or subscripting is implicit in invoking the font. A font may be designed without smaller characters for use as superscripts and subscripts. With a font like
PTOCA-4-070	this, other means must be used to create superscripts and subscripts. – Superscripting or subscripting can be accomplished by temporarily lowering or raising the B-axis coordinate of the presentation position. With this technique, the size of the superscript or subscript graphic characters is the same as the immediately preceding graphic characters. This technique is useful for typescript, and the B-axis coordinate is usually lowered or raised ½ line. – Superscripting or subscripting can be accomplished by temporarily lowering or raising the B-axis coordinate of the presentation position and invoking a different font, whose graphic characters are smaller than the immediately preceding graphic characters. Such smaller graphic characters are usually in a diffe rent style specifically designed for superscripting or subscripting. This technique is useful in formal letters and compositions. The distance that the B-axis coordinate is lowered or raised depends on the purpose of the superscript or subscript. For example, a limit to an integral is displaced further than an exponent. This last technique is the most general, since it can apply to a variety of requirements, including the following: Nested superscripts and subscripts, that is, superscripts and subscripts of superscripts or subscripts
PTOCA-4-071	Mathematical symbols of different sizes, for example, integrals, sums, products, and exponents
PTOCA-4-072	Specially stylized superscripts or subscripts, such as italic characters and Greek letters
PTOCA-4-073	In the context of superscripting and subscripting, the established baseline is the baseline on which a string of graphic characters appears to rest, the temporary baseline is the baseline on which a superscript or subscript appears to rest, and the current baseline is the baseline on which the next graphic character will appear to rest. The current baseline may be the established baseline or the temporary baseline. In PTOCA superscripting and subscripting, including the establishment of a temporary baseline, is specified by the Temporary Baseline Move control sequence. Table 10. Equations for Graphic Character Presentation
PTOCA-4-074	| WHEN | WHAT | EQUATIONS | |:--- |:--- |:--- | | Enter Object | Use initial values from data stream | $Ic$ = $Ih$, $Bc$ = $Bh$
PTOCA-4-075	| | | Or use default initial values | $Ic$ = $Io$ = 0, $Bc$ = $Bo$ = 0
PTOCA-4-076	| | Present character, general case | $Bc$ = $Bo$ = 0
PTOCA-4-077	| | | | Present variable space character | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + VSI
PTOCA-4-078	| | | Present graphic character | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI
PTOCA-4-079	| | Present character, specific cases | Following incrementing character:
PTOCA-4-080	| | | | Present first character (incrementing) | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ +/- ADJSTMNT
PTOCA-4-081	| | | Followed by second character (incrementing) | Present first character (incrementing): $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI
PTOCA-4-082	| | | | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ +/- ADJSTMNT
PTOCA-4-083	| | | | Present second character (incrementing): $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI
PTOCA-4-084	| | | Following incrementing character:
PTOCA-4-085	| | | | Present first character (non-incrementing) | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ +/- ADJSTMNT
PTOCA-4-086	| | | Present second character (incrementing) | Present first character (non-incrementing): $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$
PTOCA-4-087	| | | | Present second character (incrementing): $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI
PTOCA-4-088	| | | Following incrementing character:
PTOCA-4-089	| | | | Present Variable Space Character | $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + VSI
PTOCA-4-090	| | | Followed by first character (incrementing) | Present first character (incrementing): $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI
PTOCA-4-091	This table shows how the $I{cnew}$ coordinate is modified during the presentation of characters.
PTOCA-4-092	Figure 8. Presentation Position without Intercharacter Adjustment Figure 9. Presentation Position with Intercharacter Adjustment
PTOCA-4-093	Figure 10. Between-the-Pels Illustrations for Inline Rules Figure 11. Between-the-Pels Illustrations for Baseline Rules
PTOCA-4-094	Exception Conditions: Control sequence processing and graphic character processing can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...A mandatory parameter is missing.
PTOCA-4-095	EC-1C01...The control sequence class is invalid.
PTOCA-4-096	EC-1E01...The control sequence length is not valid.
PTOCA-4-097	EC-1E01...An optional parameter is partially missing.
PTOCA-4-098	EC-0001...The control sequence function type is invalid.
PTOCA-4-099	EC-2100...The Presentation Text object contains a graphic character code point that is not defined in the
PTOCA-4-100	active coded font. EC-0103...An attempt is made to present a character or a rule outside of the object space.
PTOCA-4-101	Presentation Text Data Presentation Text data consists of character code points and embedded control sequences, which together are called presentation text. The architected content of the presentation text depends on the subset selected by the generator of the object. Syntax: Please see the appendixes for environmental information about the syntax of Presentation Text data. Semantics: Presentation Text data inherits any modal parameter values, such as inline margin and coded font, that were specified externally to the Presentation Text object. It also inherits the current presentation position. These values may be specified by the controlling environment. The content of Presentation Text data is graphic character code points and control sequences. For the syntax, semantics, and pragmatics of the control sequences, see “Control Sequence Detailed Descriptions” on page 47. Pragmatics: Presentation text can consist of almost any string of eight-bit bytes. In the single-byte mode, these bytes may be seven-bit code points, with the leading bit zero, or eight-bit code points. In the double-byte mode, they may be sixteen-bit code points. The coded character representation is determined through reference to a coded font in the controlling environment. All code points in the presentation text are translated for presentation by reference to the active coded font, with the following exceptions: The V ariable Space Character, which is normally X'40' for EBCDIC single-byte fonts, X'20' for ASCII single-
PTOCA-4-102	byte fonts, X'4040' for EBCDIC double-byte fonts, X'2020' for ASCII double-byte fonts, and X'0020' or X'00A0' for Unicode fonts; The Control Sequence Prefix, which is X'2B'.
PTOCA-4-103	If it is necessary to present the Control Sequence Prefix code point, use the Transparent Data control sequence. All control sequence displacements are expressed in terms of the I, B coordinate system. The directions of the I, B coordinates are specified initially in the text orientation initial conditions in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor. They can be respecified within a Presentation Text object with a Set Text Orientation control sequence. When processing begins for the first Presentation Text Data in a given Presentation Text object, the current presentation position, $Ic$ and $Bc$ , is set using values from the Presentation Text Data Descriptor. The initial inline coordinate value and initial baseline coordinate value are used. When processing begins for subsequent Presentation Text data within the same Presentation Text object, the current presentation position is set to the last presentation position from the previous Presentation Text data. Each graphic character code point in a Presentation Text object causes the character reference point of the character shape to be placed at $Ic$ , $Bc$ with the character baseline parallel to the baseline. $Ic$ is increased by the character increment and, for a character immediately followed by another character, is adjusted by the intercharacter adjustment. In addition to graphic character code points, Presentation Text data can contain embedded control sequences. These are strings of two or more bytes which signal an alternate mode of processing for the content of the current Presentation Text data. Although PTOCA allows the definition of various types of control sequences, only one type of control sequence is permitted in the Presentation Text data. The escape character to be used in the Control Sequence Introducer is X'2B'. As previously stated, control sequences can be chained. However, there is no requirement that control sequences be chained.
PTOCA-4-104	Control Sequence Detailed Descriptions The following pages contain detailed descriptions of the PTOCA control sequences. The descriptions show the syntax, semantics, and pragmatics of the control sequences. Documentation Conventions: Each PTOCA control sequence is described syntactically in this reference by a table. Following each table is semantic information related to each component of the control sequence. Syntactically descriptive material following the table may indicate that additional restrictions apply to the control sequence defined by the table. Each syntax table has the following columns: Offset refers to the position of a parameter.
PTOCA-4-105	Type denotes the syntax of the parameter by data type. Please see “Parameter Data Types” for
PTOCA-4-106	more information. Name is a short field name suitable for coding.
PTOCA-4-107	Range denotes the smallest and largest valid values that may occur in this field. Negative numbers are
PTOCA-4-108	expressed in twos-complement form. Meaning gives an explanatory or descriptive name for the parameter.
PTOCA-4-109	M/O refers to the parameter's appearance in the control sequence. O means that the parameter is optional.
PTOCA-4-110	That is, the generator of the Presentation Text object does not have to include this parameter. However, the receiver must support this parameter if it supports the control sequence that contains the parameter. M means that the parameter's appearance is mandatory. If a particular control sequence occurs in the object, all mandatory parameters in that control sequence must be present. If a mandatory parameter is missing, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence to which the missing parameter belongs. Def refers to the existence of a PTOC A default value for the parameter which is to be used when no explicit
PTOCA-4-111	value is provided and the standard action is to continue. Y means that there is such a value. N means that there is no such value. This value, also called the standard action value, is defined in the description which follows each syntax table. Ind specifies the validity of the default indicator. Y means that the default indicator is valid. N means that the
PTOCA-4-112	default indicator is not valid. The default indicator is represented by X'F..F' and is described in “Control Sequence Default Indicator”. Reserved Fields Certain fields may be denoted as reserved. A reserved field is a parameter that has no functional definition at the current time, but may have at some time in the future. All bytes comprising a field defined to be reserved should be given a value of zero by generating applications. Receiving applications should ignore any value in a reserved field. Interpreting Ranges The range values shown in the syntax tables assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, they assume that the measurement base is ten inches, and that the $Xp$ -units per unit base and $Yp$ -units per unit base are 14,400. If this assumption is not correct, and a different measurement unit is supported, the correct range values can be determined by using the following steps: 1. Calculate the number of actual supported units per inch (X) as follows:
PTOCA-4-113	If the measurement base is ten inches, divide the number of supported units per ten inches by 10.
PTOCA-4-114	If the measurement base is ten centimeters, multiply the number of supported units per ten centimeters
PTOCA-4-115	by 0.254. 2. Calculate the ratio of actual supported units per inch (X) to the assumed 1,440 units per inch as follows:
PTOCA-4-116	Divide (X) by 1,440, yielding the ratio (Y).
PTOCA-4-117	Calculate the new range value in the supported measurement units as follows:
PTOCA-4-118	Convert the old range value to base ten; then multiply it by the ratio (Y).
PTOCA-4-119	Round to the nearest integer.
PTOCA-4-120	For example, suppose that the specified range is X'8000'–X'7FFF' when using 14,400 units per 10 inches. The equivalent range at a unit of measure of 1/240 of an inch is calculated as follows: 1. Supported units per inch = 2,400 ÷ 10 = 240
PTOCA-4-121	Ratio of supported units per inch to 1,440 units per inch = 240 ÷ 1,440 = 1/6
PTOCA-4-122	Range at 2,400 units per 10 inches:
PTOCA-4-123	Absolute Move Baseline (AMB) The Absolute Move Baseline control sequence moves the baseline coordinate relative to the I-axis.
PTOCA-4-124	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-125	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-126	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 4 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-127	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'D2' – X'D3' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-128	| | 4–5 | SBIN | DSPLCMNT | X'0000' – X'7FFF' | Displacement | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-129	| DSPLCMNT is a signed binary number expressed in measurement units. It does not accept the default indicator. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges” on. ### Semantics This control sequence specifies a displacement, DSPLCMNT, in the B-direction from the I-axis of the object space to a new baseline coordinate position. After execution of this control sequence, presentation is resumed at the new baseline coordinate position. This control sequence does not modify the current inline coordinate position. $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ $B{cnew}$ = $Bo$ + DSPLCMNT If the value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOC A, exception condition EC-1301 exists. The standard action in this case is to continue presentation according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-130	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1301...The value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-131	EC-0103...The presentation position is outside the object space and presentation is attempted.
PTOCA-4-132	EC-1403...Negative DSPLCMNT is not valid.
PTOCA-4-133	Absolute Move Inline (AMI) The Absolute Move Inline control sequence moves the inline coordinate position relative to the B-axis.
PTOCA-4-134	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control sequence prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-135	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-136	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 4 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-137	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'C6' – X'C7' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-138	| | 4–5 | SBIN | DSPLCMNT | X'0000' – X'7FFF' | Displacement | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-139	| DSPLCMNT is a signed binary number expressed in measurement units. It does not accept the default indicator. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges” on. ### Semantics This control sequence specifies a displacement, DSPLCMNT, in the I-direction from the B-axis of the object space to a new inline coordinate position, and resumes presentation at the new inline coordinate position. It does not modify the current baseline coordinate position. $I{cnew}$ = $Io$ + DSPLCMNT $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ If the value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOC A, exception condition EC-1401 exists. The standard action in this case is to continue presentation according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-140	Pragmatics If the value of DSPLCMNT is zero, the addressable position is at the B-axis, and any intercharacter adjustment is not applied. If a move is to a presentation position for which the character's character box will exceed the object space and an attempt is made to present there, exception condition EC-0103 exists. The standard action in this case is to refrain from presenting the character that exceeds the object space, and to continue processing without presenting characters until the presentation position occupies a valid addressable position for the character being presented. Then presentation of characters may resume.
PTOCA-4-141	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1401...The value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-142	EC-0103...The presentation position is outside the object space and presentation is attempted.
PTOCA-4-143	Begin Line (BLN) The Begin Line control sequence begins a new line.
PTOCA-4-144	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control sequence prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-145	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-146	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 2 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-147	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'D8' – X'D9' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-148	Begin Suppression (BSU) The Begin Suppression control sequence marks the beginning of a string of presentation text that may be suppressed from the visible output.
PTOCA-4-149	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-150	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-151	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 3 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-152	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'F2' – X'F3' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-153	| | 4 | CODE | LID | X'00' – X'FF' | Suppression identifier | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-154	| This control sequence marks the beginning of a string of presentation text that may be suppressed from the visible output. It is activated by a local identifier, LID. This control sequence works in conjunction with the End Suppression control sequence, which also contains a LID. Please see “End Suppression (ESU)”. If the LID in this control sequence has been activated for the current Presentation Text object in the data stream hierarchy, the string of presentation text between this control sequence and the next End Suppression control sequence with the same LID does not appear in the visible output. Even though the text does not appear, all control sequences within the suppressed field are executed, and the I-coordinate and B-coordinate are updated as if the text had appeared. Only the actual presentation of the graphic characters and rules is suppressed. Please see Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for further information about suppression. If the value of the LID is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC- 9801 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the control sequence. Please see the Pragmatics
PTOCA-4-155	section for additional exception conditions. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation. If the LID in this control sequence is not activated in the data stream hierarchy, this control sequence and the corresponding End Suppression control sequence are processed as no-operations.
PTOCA-4-156	Pragmatics Several kinds of exception conditions can exist with the Begin and End Suppression control sequences. These exception conditions can exist whether or not the LID has been activated in the data-stream hierarchy. Nesting of Begin and End Suppression control sequences is not allowed. If a second Begin Suppression
PTOCA-4-157	If a Begin Suppression control sequence is followed by an End Suppression control sequence that has a
PTOCA-4-158	diffe rent value for the LID, exception condition EC-0201 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the End Suppression control sequence. If an End Suppression control sequence occurs in a Presentation Text object without a previous valid Begin
PTOCA-4-159	Suppression control sequence, exception condition EC-0201 exists. The standard action is to ignore the End Suppression control sequence. If a Begin Suppression control sequence appears in a Presentation Text object with no corresponding End
PTOCA-4-160	Suppression control sequence, exception condition EC-0401 exists. The standard action in this case is to process the object as if the corresponding End Suppression control sequence were present at the end of the object. That is, all of the data following the Begin Suppression control sequence is suppressed.
PTOCA-4-161	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9801...The value of the LID is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-162	EC-0601...Nesting exists.
PTOCA-4-163	EC-0201...The values of the LIDs do not match within a BSU, ESU pair.
PTOCA-4-164	EC-0201...An ESU control sequence occurs without a preceding BSU control sequence.
PTOCA-4-165	EC-0401...A BSU control sequence occurs without a succeeding ESU control sequence.
PTOCA-4-166	Draw B-axis Rule (DBR) The Draw B-axis Rule control sequence draws a rule in the B-direction.
PTOCA-4-167	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-168	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-169	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 4, 7 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-170	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'E6' – X'E7' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-171	| | 4–5 | SBIN | RLENGTH | X'8000' – X'7FFF' | Length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-172	| | 6–8 | SBIN | RWIDTH | See Semantics section | Width | O | Y | Y
PTOCA-4-173	| a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-174	Semantics This control sequence specifies the dimensions of a rule that extends from the current presentation position in both the B-direction and the I-direction. The current I-axis and B-axis coordinates are not changed by this control sequence. The length parameter, RLENGTH, is the length of the rule in the B-direction. If RLENGTH is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to treat this control sequence as a no-operation. If the value of RLENGTH is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-8202 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue presentation with the value determined according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The width parameter, RWIDTH, is the width of rule in the I-direction. RWIDTH consists of a three-byte two-part binary number of the form AB. Both A and B are in measurement units. A is a two-byte binary number from -32,768 through +32,767
PTOCA-4-175	B is a one-byte binary fraction with bit 0 denoting 1/2 measurement unit, bit 1 denoting 1/4 measurement
PTOCA-4-176	Pragmatics If a width or length is specified that, when converted to pels, requires finer resolution than a device supports, the device uses the next smaller width or length that it does support. If a specified width or length becomes less than the finest device resolution, the device uses its finest resolution. If the value of RLENGTH or RWIDTH is zero, no marks appear. Such resolution correction does not constitute an exception condition. If a parameter value will cause any part of the rule to extend outside of the object space, exception condition code EC-0103 exists. The standard actions in this case are the following: For extensions in the B-direction, truncate the rule at the object space boundary. Receivers using character
PTOCA-4-177	underscore to create rules must position, begin, or end characters in such a way as to prevent extension beyond the limits of the object space. For extensions in the I-direction, limit presentation to the portion of the rule that can be presented within the
PTOCA-4-178	object space. If the receiver's minimum resolution will cause the object space to be exceeded, do not present the rule. A negative value for RLENGTH or RWIDTH reverses the direction of the corresponding extent, allowing definition of a rule in four directions from a given presentation position. The support of negative values in the I- direction and the B-direction is optional. A rule of length +1 must have a diffe rent starting point from a rule of -1. The dif ference, within the tolerances of the receiver, is equal to the receiver's finest resolution. If a parameter value is received by a receiver that does not support it, exception condition EC-8202 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the control sequence. The recommended default value for RWIDTH is receiver-dependent. For example, it may be the width of the vertical bar character in the active font. A receiver incapable of drawing the rule may substitute a graphic sequence that represents it. For further information on rule positioning, please refer to Figure 11.
PTOCA-4-179	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0103...A parameter value will cause the rule to be outside the object space.
PTOCA-4-180	EC-1E01...RLENGTH is missing.
PTOCA-4-181	EC-8002...The value for RWIDTH is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-182	EC-8202...The value for RLENGTH is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA; or, a
PTOCA-4-183	Draw I-axis Rule (DIR) The Draw I-axis Rule control sequence draws a rule in the I-direction.
PTOCA-4-184	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-185	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-186	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 4, 7 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-187	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'E4' – X'E5' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-188	| | 4–5 | SBIN | RLENGTH | X'8000' – X'7FFF' | Length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-189	| | 6–8 | SBIN | RWIDTH | See Semantics section | Width | O | Y | Y
PTOCA-4-190	| a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-191	Semantics This control sequence specifies dimensions of a rule that extends from the current presentation position in both the I-direction and the B-direction. The current I-axis and B-axis coordinates are not changed by this control sequence. The length parameter, RLENGTH, is the length of the rule in the I-direction. If RLENGTH is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to treat this control sequence as a no-operation. If the value of RLENGTH is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-8202 exists. The standard action is to continue presentation with the value determined according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The width parameter, RWIDTH, is the width of the rule in the B-direction. RWIDTH consists of a three-byte two-part binary number of the form AB. Both A and B are in measurement units. A is a two-byte binary number from -32,768 through +32,767
PTOCA-4-192	B is a one-byte binary fraction with bit 0 denoting 1/2 measurement unit, bit 1 denoting 1/4 measurement
PTOCA-4-193	The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-194	Pragmatics If a width or length is specified that, when converted to pels, requires finer resolution than a device supports, the device uses the next smaller width or length that it does support. If a specified width or length becomes less than the finest device resolution, the device uses its finest resolution. If the value of RLENGTH or RWIDTH is zero, no marks appear. Such resolution correction does not constitute an exception condition. If a parameter value will cause any part of the rule to extend outside of the object space, exception condition EC- 0103 exists. The standard actions in this case are the following:
PTOCA-4-195	For extensions in the I-direction, truncate the rule at the object space boundary. Receivers using character
PTOCA-4-196	underscore to create rules must position, begin, or end characters in such a way as to prevent extension beyond the limits of the object space. For extensions in the B-direction, presentation is limited to the portion of the rule that can be presented within
PTOCA-4-197	the object space. If the receiver's minimum resolution will cause the object space to be exceeded, do not present the rule. A negative value of RLENGTH or RWID TH reverses the direction of the corresponding extent, allowing definition of a rule in four directions from a given presentation position. The support of negative values in the I- direction and B-direction is optional. A rule of length +1 must have a diffe rent starting point from a rule of -1. The dif ference, within the tolerances of the receiver, is equal to the receiver's finest resolution. If a parameter value is received by a receiver that does not support it, exception condition EC-8202 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the control sequence. The recommended default value for RWIDTH is receiver-dependent. For example, it may be the width of the underscore character in the active font. A receiver incapable of drawing the rule may substitute a graphic sequence that represents it. For further information on rule positioning, please refer to Figure 10.
PTOCA-4-198	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0103...A parameter value will cause the rule to be outside the object space.
PTOCA-4-199	EC-1E01...RLENGTH is missing.
PTOCA-4-200	EC-8002...The value for RWIDTH is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-201	EC-8202...The value for RLENGTH is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA; or, a
PTOCA-4-202	Encrypted Data (ENC) The Encrypted Data control sequence contains a sequence of bytes that are encrypted and must be decrypted into text strings for standard text processing. This data is not scanned for embedded control sequences.
PTOCA-4-203	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-204	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-205	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 7–255 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-206	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'98' – X'99' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-207	| | 4-7 | | | | Reserved; should be zero | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-208	| | 8-256 | UNDF | ENCDATA | Not applicable | Encrypted bytes to be decrypted | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-209	| The data type of the contents of ENCDATA is UNDF (undefined). ENCDATA does not accept the default indicator, but X'F....F' is valid.
PTOCA-4-210	Pragmatics If the value of the LENGTH field is less than 7, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue processing. When considering the exception conditions that can occur with an ENC, it is important to note that there are three cases: 1. The ENCDATA can be decrypted into printable code points
PTOCA-4-211	The ENCDATA cannot be decrypted
PTOCA-4-212	The ENCDATA cannot be decrypted and alternate text is used
PTOCA-4-213	for the text string originally intended to be printed. If no alternate text has been set using the SEA control, then the standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue processing. Application Note: It is recommended that a positioning control sequence (such as an AMI) follow each ENC (or group of ENCs in the case where the ENCDATA is concatenated together) to make sure that any text that follows the ENCDATA is positioned correctly (should the byte data fail to be decrypted). The ENCDATA cannot be decrypted and alternate text is used: When alternate text is used, no absolute move, relative move, baseline positioning, or other immediate or modal function is available. If code points representing control sequences are processed within ALTTEXT, they are presented as graphic characters, and the active coded font determines whether any character shapes appear on the presentation surface. If the alternate text causes any part of the character box of the character to exceed the object space, exception condition EC-0103 exists. The standard action is not to present the character that exceeds the object space, and continue processing without presenting characters until the presentation position is returned to an addressable position within the object space that is a valid presentation position for the character being presented. Then presentation of characters may resume. The data length of the alternate text must be an even number for double-byte fonts. If the length of the alternate text is an odd number when a double-byte font is active, exception condition EC-1A01 exists. The standard action is to process the alternate text up to the last byte, skip the odd byte, and continue processing. If the character encoding in the alternate text is Unicode but the code points in the alternate text character string are not valid Unicode data, exception condition EC-1A03 exists. The standard action is to skip the remainder of the code points in the alternate text and continue processing.
PTOCA-4-214	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0103...The decrypted character string or alternate text will cause part of a character's character box to be
PTOCA-4-215	outside the object space. EC-1A01...The length of the decrypted character string or alternate text is an odd number, but a double-byte
PTOCA-4-216	font is active. EC-1A03...Invalid Unicode data in the decrypted character string or alternate text. This can be caused by
PTOCA-4-217	one of the following: – A high-order surrogate code value was not immediately followed by a low-order surrogate code value. The high-order surrogate range is U+D800 through U+DBFF. – A low-order surrogate code value was not immediately preceded by a high-order surrogate code value. The low-order surrogate range is U+DC00 through U+DFFF. – An illegal UTF-8 byte sequence, as defined in the Unicode 3.2 Specification, was specified. For more information on illegal UTF-8 byte sequences, see Table 15. EC-1E01...LENGTH is not valid.
PTOCA-4-218	EC-9D01...Decryption is not available on this device.
PTOCA-4-219	EC-9D02...Decryption reported an error.
PTOCA-4-220	EC-9D03...No key information has been set for decryption.
PTOCA-4-221	| Offset | Type | Name | Range | Meaning | M/O | Def | Ind | |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- | | 0 | CODE | PREFIX | X'2B' | Control Sequence Prefix | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-222	| | 1 | CODE | CLASS | X'D3' | Control sequence class | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-223	| | 2 | UBIN | LENGTH | 3 | Control sequence length | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-224	| | 3 | CODE | TYPE | X'F4' – X'F5' | Control sequence function type | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-225	| | 4 | CODE | LID | X'00' – X'FF' | Suppression identifier | M | N | N
PTOCA-4-226	| This control sequence marks the end of a string of presentation text that has been suppressed. It works in conjunction with the Begin Suppression control sequence. Please see “Begin Suppression (BSU)” for information on the Begin Suppression control sequence. If the value of the LID is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-9801 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the value determined according to the data- stream hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-227	Pragmatics This control sequence does not change the current addressable position. In order to suppress a text string from the visible output, the string should be bounded by a Begin Suppression control sequence and an End Suppression control sequence that have the same values for the LID. In addition, the controlling environment must activate the LID.
PTOCA-4-228	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception condition: EC-9801...The value of LID is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-229	Glyph Advance Run (GAR) The Glyph Advance Run control sequence specifies the relative displacement along the current baseline (in the i-direction) to the glyph origin for each glyph ID in the preceding GIR from the text position at the start of the GLC. ### Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 UBIN LENGTH X'04' – X'FE';
PTOCA-4-230	even values only Control sequence length. The length is 4 + n∙(size of ADVANCE) M N N 1 CODE TYPE X'8C', X'8D' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-231	function type M N N 2-3 X'0000' Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-232	Zero or more advances along the baseline in the following format: +0-1 UBIN ADVANCE X'0000' – X'FFFF' Glyph advance along the baseline O N N ADVANCE is a signed binary number in measurement units. The range for ADVANCE assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-233	Semantics This control sequence carries a sequence of glyph advances that correspond to the glyph IDs in the preceding GIR. Each advance is a 2-byte unsigned displacement along the current baseline that is measured from the text position that was defined at the start of the GLC chain to the glyph origin for each glyph ID. The displacement is in the i-axis direction. The first advance corresponds to the first glyph ID, the second advance corresponds to the second glyph ID, and so forth. Advances are specified using the current measurement units. Each GAR control sequence must be chained to a preceding GIR control sequence. It can be followed by a chained GOR, GIR, or UCT control sequence. If it is followed by a diffe rent control sequence, the GAR terminates the GLC chain.
PTOCA-4-234	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9C03...Invalid sequence. The GAR is not preceded by a GIR, or, if it indicates chaining, it is not followed
PTOCA-4-235	by a GOR, GIR, or a UCT. EC-9C06...GIR, GAR, or GOR control sequence found outside of a GLC chain. A GIR, GAR, or GOR was
PTOCA-4-236	found that is not part of a GLC chain. EC-9C08...Glyph Advance count mismatch. The number of glyph advances specified is not the same as the
PTOCA-4-237	Glyph ID Run (GIR) The Glyph ID Run control sequence specifies an array of glyph IDs from the current TrueType/OpenType font.
PTOCA-4-238	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 UBIN LENGTH X'04' – X'FE';
PTOCA-4-239	even values only Control sequence length. The length is 4 + n∙(size of GLYPHID) M N N 1 CODE TYPE X'8B' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-240	function type M N N 2-3 X'0000' Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-241	Zero or more glyph IDs in the following format: +0-1 UBIN GLYPHID X'0000' – X'FFFF' Glyph ID O N N ### Semantics This control sequence carries a sequence of glyph ids in the current font or in a font linked to the current font. This font is identified by the font OID in the GLC. If the font is in a font collection, the OID in the GLC corresponds to the font collection and the font name in the GLC is used to identify the font. A GIR control sequence must be chained to a GLC, if in the first grouping, or to a preceding GAR or GOR, if in subsequent groupings. It must be followed by a chained GAR that contains a glyph advance for each glyph ID in this control sequence.
PTOCA-4-242	Pragmatics It is possible that a text run may require more glyphs than the GIR can contain. Composition applications can handle this by specifying multiple GIR/GAR[/GOR] groupings. If there are n glyph IDs contained in a GIR, then the chained GAR must contain n advances and the optional GOR must contain n offsets.
PTOCA-4-243	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9C02...Invalid glyph ID. The current font does not contain a specified glyph ID.
PTOCA-4-244	EC-9C03...Invalid sequence. The GIR is not preceded by either a GLC or a GAR or a GOR.
PTOCA-4-245	EC-9C06...GIR, GAR, or GOR control sequence found outside of a GLC chain. A GIR, GAR, or GOR was
PTOCA-4-246	Glyph Layout Control (GLC) The Glyph Layout Control control sequence marks the start of one or more glyph run groupings that together render text using arrays of glyph identifiers and positions.
PTOCA-4-247	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-248	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-249	UBIN LENGTH 10 - (p - 1) Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-250	CODE TYPE X'6D' Control sequence function
PTOCA-4-251	type M N N 4–5 SBIN IADVNCE X'8000' – X'7FFF' The advance along the current baseline after processing this GLC chain. A value of X'0000' indicates that the current text position is not changed after processing the GLC chain. M N N 6 UBIN OIDLGTH 0, 13-129 Length of FONTOID
PTOCA-4-252	parameter M N N 7 UBIN FFNLGTH 0 - (255 - (10 +
PTOCA-4-253	OIDLGTH)), even values only Length of FFONTNME parameter M N N 8-1 1 X'00...00' Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-254	12-n UBIN FONTOID Object Identifier for the font that contains the glyphs to be rendered. Offset 12 – must be X'06'
PTOCA-4-255	Offset 13 – length of
PTOCA-4-256	content bytes Offset 14 to n – OID
PTOCA-4-257	the current text position after the GLC chain has been processed. A value of X'0000' indicates that the current text position is not changed after processing the GLC chain. OIDLGTH specifies the length in bytes of the FONT OID parameter. A value of X'00' indicates that the FONT OID parameter is not specified and the presentation device is to use the FONTOID specified in the previous GLC in the text object that specified this parameter. Note that when a font matching the FONT OID is found, it is always processed with the presentation parameters determined by the font mapping for the LID in the last SCFL control sequence. Application Note: When OIDLGTH = 0, the presentation device searches backwards through the PTOCA control sequences until a GLC with an OID is found or the beginning of the text object is reached. In MO:DCA environments, the beginning of the text object is indicated by the Begin Presentation Text (BPT) structured field, which causes AFP presentation servers to reset the currently active font to the presentation device default font by issuing a SCFL with LID = X'FF'. The AFP generator must therefore always define an active font at the start of the text object by generating a SCFL control sequence that specifies the font LID and a GLC that specifies the font OID. FFNLGTH specifies the length in bytes of the FFONTNME parameter. A value of X'00' indicates that the FFONTNME parameter is not specified. This parameter must be set to X'00' if the OIDLGTH parameter is set to X'00', or exception condition EC-9C0B exists. FONT OID specifies the OID of the font used to present the glyph runs in the GLC chain. If the font is in a font collection, the OID is for the collection. Presentation devices must validate the OID specified in the GLC against the current font or font collection. If the current font is linked to additional fonts, the FONT OID may refer to the current font (the base font) or to any font linked to that base font. Only the font identified by FONT OID will be used with the GLC chain, the other linked fonts are ignored when placing glyphs. See the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004 for the definition of the algorithm used to calculate the OID of a TrueType/OpenType font. FFONTNME specifies the Full Font Name (FFN) of the font identified by the FONT OID parameter, unless the FONT OID corresponds to a font collection. If FONT OID corresponds to a font collection, the FFONTNME parameterspecifies the Full Font Name of the font in the collection. This parameter is used to search for a specific font in a font collection if the FONT OID parameter identifies a collection. The name is encoded in UTF- 16BE. This parameter must not be specified if the FONTOID parameter is not specified; if it is, exception condition EC-9C0B exists.
PTOCA-4-258	Table 1 1 Interaction of GLC chain with other control sequences (cont'd.) Control Sequence Effect Absolute Move Inline (AMI) Moves the inline coordinate position relative to the B-axis Begin Line (BLN) Begins a new line Begin Suppression (BSU)/End Suppression (ESU) Causes presentation of the glyphs in all GLC chains that are between the BSU and ESU to be suppressed if the corresponding suppression ID is activated Draw B-axis Rule (DBR) Has no effect on subsequent GLC presentation Draw I-axis Rule (DIR) Has no effect on subsequent GLC presentation No Operation (NOP) Has no effect on subsequent GLC presentation Relative Move Baseline (RMB) Moves the baseline coordinate relative to the current baseline coordinate position Relative Move Inline (RMI) Moves the inline coordinate relative to the current inline position Repeat String (RPS) Has no effect on subsequent GLC presentation Transparent Data (TRN) Has no effect on subsequent GLC presentation The following examples demonstrate various valid examples of glyph layout control chaining: Example 1. GLC chain without optional controls. The GLC may reference the base font, or any font linked to
PTOCA-4-259	the current font. Since all glyphs are positioned on the current effective baseline, the GOR control sequence is omitted: GLC GIR GAR <<chain ends>> Example 2. GLC chain with optional controls. Since one or more glyphs must be positioned with an offset
PTOCA-4-260	from the baseline, the optional GOR control sequence is included in this chain. The PTOCA chain is terminated by an optional UCT control which carries the Unicode encoded text presented by the glyph layout control sequences: GLC GIR GAR GOR UCT <<chain ends>> Example 3. GLC chain with multiple GIR/GAR[/GOR] groupings. The text required more glyphs than a single
PTOCA-4-261	GIR could list, so multiple GIR/GAR[/GOR] groupings are included. Since one or more glyphs in the first grouping must be positioned with an offset from the baseline, the optional GOR control sequence is included in this group. The optional GOR is not needed in the second grouping, and is omitted. The PTOCA chain is terminated by an optional UCT control which carries the Unicode encoded text presented by the glyph layout control sequences: GLC GIR GAR GOR GIR GAR UCT <<chain ends>>
PTOCA-4-262	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9C00...Font Mismatch. The object OID specified in the GLC control sequence does not match the object
PTOCA-4-263	OID of the current font or any font linked to the current font. If the OID matched the OID of a font collection, the Full Font Name did not match any font in the collection. EC-9C01...Font format not valid for use with glyph layout control sequences. The current font is not a
PTOCA-4-264	TrueType/OpenType font. EC-9C03...Unexpected control sequence. An unexpected control sequence was encountered between the
PTOCA-4-265	EC-9C09...Missing font OID. The GLC specified an OIDLGTH of zero, but no previous font OID was supplied
PTOCA-4-266	within the text object. EC-9C0A...Count mismatch or invalid length. The byte count specified by the OIDLGTH and FFONTNME
PTOCA-4-267	parameters is not consistent with the overall control sequence length, or the OIDLGTH or FFNLGTH parameters are outside their valid range. EC-9C0B...Full Font Name specified without font OID. A font OID was not specified (OIDLGTH = 0), but a
PTOCA-4-268	Glyph Offset Run (GOR) The Glyph offset Run control sequence specifies an offset (relative displacement) from the current baseline (in the b-direction) to the glyph origin for each glyph ID in the preceding GIR.
PTOCA-4-269	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 UBIN LENGTH X'04' – X'FE';
PTOCA-4-270	even values only Control sequence length. The length is 4 + n∙(size of OFFSET) M N N 1 CODE TYPE X'8E', X'8F' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-271	function type M N N 2-3 X'0000' Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-272	Zero or more offsets from the current baseline in the following format: +0-1 SBIN OFFSET X'8000' – X'7FFF' Glyph offset from the current baseline O N N ### Semantics This control sequence carries a sequence of glyph offsets that correspond to the glyph IDs in the preceding GIR. Each offset is a 2-byte signed displacement from the current baseline in the b-axis direction to the glyph origin for each glyph ID. Application of the offset does not change the position of the current baseline. That is, the offset for each glyph ID is applied against the baseline that was defined at the start of the GLC chain. The first offset corresponds to the first glyph ID and the first glyph advance, the second offset corresponds to the second glyph ID and the second glyph advance, and so forth. offsets are specified using the current measurement units. A positive offset is measured towards the i-axis; a negative offset is measured away from the i-axis. Architecture Note: The direction in which GOR offsets are measured, as indicated by the sign of the offset, is opposite to the direction in which increments in a RMB are measured, as indicated by the sign of the increment. The GOR control sequence is optional, but if present, must be chained to a GAR. It can be followed by a chained GIR or UCT. Composition applications must specify the same number of glyph offsets as glyph advances so that presentation devices can offset the correct glyph.
PTOCA-4-273	Pragmatics If a composition application needs to offset one glyph, it must offset all the glyphs identified in the preceding GIR. ### Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9C03...Invalid sequence. The GOR is not preceded by a GAR, or, if it indicates chaining, is not followed
PTOCA-4-274	by a GIR or a UCT. EC-9C06...GIR, GAR, or GOR control sequence found outside of a GLC chain. A GIR, GAR, or GOR was
PTOCA-4-275	found that is not part of a GLC chain. EC-9C08...Glyph offset count mismatch. The number of glyph offsets specified is not the same as the
PTOCA-4-276	No Operation (NOP) The No Operation control sequence has no effect on presentation.
PTOCA-4-277	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-278	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-279	UBIN LENGTH 2–255 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-280	CODE TYPE X'F8' – X'F9' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-281	Overstrike (OVS) The Overstrike control sequence identifies text that is to be overstruck with a specified character.
PTOCA-4-282	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-283	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-284	UBIN LENGTH 5 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-285	CODE TYPE X'72' – X'73' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-286	function type M N N 4 BITS BYPSIDEN See
PTOCA-4-287	Semantics Bypass identifiers M Y Y 5–6 CODE OVERCHAR X'0000' – X'FFFF' Overstrike identifiers M N N BYPSIDEN is a flag byte with no measurement units. The PTOCA default for BYPSIDEN is X'01'. OVERCHAR is defined as a one-byte or two-byte code point that, when coupled with the active coded font, specifies the character to be used for overstriking. Single-byte code points are loaded in byte 6. OVERCHAR does not accept the default indicator.
PTOCA-4-288	Semantics Overstrike is accomplished with a pair of Overstrike control sequences. A beginning OVS with a non-zero value in BYPSIDEN bits 4-7 activates overstrike. An ending OVS with a zero value in BYPSIDEN bits 4-7 deactivates overstrike. The beginning OVS control sequence immediately precedes the field of text to be overstruck. It specifies the following: The overstrike character
PTOCA-4-289	How to place the overstrike characters in relation to the characters in the text field
PTOCA-4-290	Which controlled inline white space is to be overstruck
PTOCA-4-291	The text field to be overstruck, called the overstrike field, is delimited by the beginning OVS and either an ending OVS control sequence or the end of the Presentation Text object. The overstrike field is a sequential string of presentation text. BYPSIDEN specifies which controlled inline white space within the overstrike field is to be overstruck. Controlled inline white space is that area of the presented line that contains no visible material due to movement of the presentation position in the I-direction caused by the following: Absolute Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-292	Relative Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-293	Space character or variable space character
PTOCA-4-294	Application Note: The following code points are normally used for the variable space character: X'40' in EBCDIC single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-295	X'20' in ASCII single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-296	X'4040' in EBCDIC double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-297	X'2020' in ASCII double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-298	The following code points are used for the variable space character in TrueType/OpenType fonts that use a Unicode (UTF-16) encoding: X'0020'
PTOCA-4-299	X'00A0'
PTOCA-4-300	Movement of the current inline position in the I-direction to or through a presentation position that already contains material to be overstruck creates controlled inline white space for the entire move in the I-direction. Not all inline white space is controlled. White space resulting from non-printing characters (other than space characters or variable space characters) within the character set, from substitution of non-printing characters for unsupported characters, from intercharacter adjustment, or from the inline margin is not considered controlled inline white space. Inline moves that cause the current addressable position to move in a direction opposite to the I-direction, that is, negative inline moves, do not cause overstrike. BYPSIDEN is bit-encoded as follows. BIT MEANING 0-3 Reserved, that is, set to B'0' by generators and ignored by receivers
PTOCA-4-301	Bypass Relative Move Inline
PTOCA-4-302	Bypass Absolute Move Inline
PTOCA-4-303	Bypass space characters and variable space characters
PTOCA-4-304	No Bypass in Effect
PTOCA-4-305	X'0F', since BYPSIDEN bits 0-3 are reserved, should be set to zero by generators, and should be ignored by receivers. To avoid confusion, it is strongly recommended that a default indicator not be used for this parameter, and that the value X'01' is specified directly if the default is desired. An overstrike area is that portion of the overstrike field for which text is actually overstruck. An overstrike area is delimited by the addressable position in the following cases.: A beginning OVS
PTOCA-4-306	Either end of bypassed controlled inline white space
PTOCA-4-307	Either end of a baseline move, which may be for the established baseline or for a temporary baseline
PTOCA-4-308	The beginning of negative changes in the presentation position caused by inline moves or negative
PTOCA-4-309	intercharacter adjustments Boundaries where violation causes truncation
PTOCA-4-310	An ending OVS
PTOCA-4-311	The end of the Presentation Text object
PTOCA-4-312	Additionally, the dimension in the positive I-direction of the overstrike field is defined by the minimum and maximum I-coordinates specified between the overstrike area delimiters. White space resulting from the application of the inline margin is overstruck only if this area is entered by means of an inline move. Overstrike characters are presented side by side without regard to the position of the characters being overstruck. Intercharacter adjustments are not applied to the placement of overstrike characters. The number of overstrike characters required for each overstrike area within an overstrike field is equal to the inline dimension of the overstrike area divided by the character increment of the overstrike character. If the result of this division is less than one, one overstrike character must be presented in the overstrike area. If the result of this division is greater than one and is not an integer, the decision to place an overstrike character is based on rounding to the nearest integer. Normally this rounding is down to the next lower integer, except as specified in the Pragmatics section. If the value of OVERCHAR is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, an exception condition exists. See the Pragmatics section for the exception condition code and the standard action.
PTOCA-4-313	Presentation Text object contains a beginning OVS without a matching ending OVS, no exception condition exists. T erminate the OVS at the end of the Presentation Text object. There is no provision in this control sequence to specify a coded font, and Set Coded Font Local control sequences that occur within the overstrike field do not affect the appearance of the overstrike character. If the desired overstrike character is not defined in the active font which is controlling the text presentation, the beginning Overstrike control sequence must be preceded by a Set Coded Font Local control sequence that specifies a different coded font that contains the overstrike character. In this case, the coded font controlling the text presentation must be re-established following the ending Overstrike control sequence. If the graphic character specified in the OVS control sequence is not valid in the active coded font, exception condition EC- 2100 exists. The standard action is to use a device default character as the overstrike character. If the graphic
PTOCA-4-314	character does not have a rotation available that is equivalent to the current character rotation, exception condition EC-3F02 exists. The standard action is to accomplish the overstrike function to the best of the receiver's ability. There are no syntactic restrictions on the occurrence of Begin Line, Absolute Move Baseline, Relative Move Baseline, and Temporary Baseline Move control sequences within the overstrike field. Color is not a parameter of this control sequence. Utilization of algorithms to reposition the overstrike characters within the overstrike areas of an overstrike field is restricted in several ways. At least one overstrike character must occur in an overstrike area.
PTOCA-4-315	The overstrike characters must be positioned relative to the delimiters of the overstrike area, rather than to
PTOCA-4-316	the last overstrike character in any previous overstrike area. Overlap of any portion of the B-space of the overstrike character with the B-space of a character not within
PTOCA-4-317	the overstrike area is considered unacceptable, except in the case of a single character. Overlap of any portion of the B-space of the overstrike character with the B-space of another overstrike
PTOCA-4-318	character within the overstrike field should be avoided. If overlap occurs, it should not be allowed to exceed 1/4 the B-space of either of the characters. Rounding of f the number of overstrike characters is permitted. The minimum required support is to round of f
PTOCA-4-319	to the nearest integer number of overstrike characters in the overstrike area. This overlap may be allowed at a change of baseline, except when the overlap causes a portion of the character box to extend beyond a boundary of the object space. Multiple passes over the same portions of the presentation space through the use of AMI and RMI control
PTOCA-4-320	sequences are not restricted. An area of zero length is not considered to be a valid overstrike area.
PTOCA-4-321	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-2100...The graphic character specified is not valid in the active font.
PTOCA-4-322	EC-3F02...The graphic character specified does not have a rotation available that is equivalent to the current
PTOCA-4-323	character rotation. EC-9A01...The graphic character specified has an invalid character increment or is not a printable character.
PTOCA-4-324	Relative Move Baseline (RMB) The Relative Move Baseline control sequence moves the baseline coordinate relative to the current baseline coordinate position. ### Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-325	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-326	UBIN LENGTH 4 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-327	CODE TYPE X'D4' – X'D5' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-328	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN INCRMENT X'8000' – X'7FFF' Increment M N N INCRMENT is a signed binary number in measurement units. It does not accept the default indicator. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a diffe rent measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-329	Semantics This control sequence specifies an increment, INCRMENT, in the B-direction from the current baseline coordinate position to a new baseline coordinate position. After execution of this control sequence, presentation is resumed at the new baseline coordinate position. A positive value causes movement in the B- direction, while a negative value causes movement toward the I-axis. This control sequence does not modify the current inline coordinate position. $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ + INCRMENT where 0 <= $B{cnew}$ <= B-extent If the value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1601 exists. The standard action is to continue presentation according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-330	INCRMENT is negative, exception condition EC-1403 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence. ### Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1601...The value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-331	EC-0103..The presentation position is outside the object space and presentation is attempted.
PTOCA-4-332	EC-1403...Negative INCRMENT is not valid.
PTOCA-4-333	Relative Move Inline (RMI) The Relative Move Inline control sequence moves the inline coordinate of the presentation position relative to the current inline position.
PTOCA-4-334	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-335	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-336	UBIN LENGTH 4 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-337	CODE TYPE X'C8' – X'C9' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-338	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN INCRMENT X'8000' – X'7FFF' Increment M N N INCRMENT is a signed binary number in measurement units. It does not accept the default indicator. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a diffe rent measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-339	Semantics This control sequence specifies an increment, INCRMENT, in the I-direction from the current inline coordinate position to a new inline coordinate position. After execution of this control sequence, presentation is resumed at the new inline coordinate position. A positive value is in the direction of line growth, while a negative value logically backspaces. This control sequence does not modify the current baseline coordinate position. $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + INCRMENT where 0 <= $I{cnew}$ <= I-extent $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ If the value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1501 exists. The standard action is to continue presentation according to the description given in the Pragmatics section. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-340	Pragmatics If the value of INCRMENT is zero, the addressable position is not moved, and any intercharacter adjustment is not applied. If a move is to a presentation position for which the character's character box will exceed the object space and an attempt is made to present there, exception condition EC-0103 exists. The standard action is to refrain from presenting the character that exceeds the object space, and continue processing without presenting characters until the presentation position occupies a valid addressable position for the character being presented. Then presentation of characters may resume.
PTOCA-4-341	EC-1501...The value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-342	EC-0103..The presentation position is outside the object space and presentation is attempted.
PTOCA-4-343	Repeat String (RPS) ### Syntax The Repeat String control sequence contains a string of graphic character code points that is repeated on the current line. Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-344	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-345	UBIN LENGTH 4–255 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-346	CODE TYPE X'EE' – X'EF' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-347	function type M N N 4–5 UBIN RLENGTH 0–32,767 Repeat length M N N 6–256 CHAR RPTDATA Not applicable Repeated data O N N The contents of RPTDATA are unknown. RLENGTH is a binary number expressing byte count. RLENGTH and RPTDATA do not accept the default indicator.
PTOCA-4-348	action is to ignore the Repeat String control sequence and continue processing. If the value of RLENGTH is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1901 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue presenting. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about function subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data-stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-349	Pragmatics The standard action value for RLENGTH is the length of RPTDATA. If any part of a character's character box will exceed the object space as a result of the Repeat String control sequence and an attempt is made to present the string of characters, exception condition EC-0103 exists. The standard action is not to present the character that exceeds the object space and to continue processing without presenting graphic characters until the presentation position is returned to an addressable position that is a valid presentation position for the character being presented. If the value of the control sequence length parameter is four, indicating a length of four bytes, and the value of RLENGTH is zero, that is, there are no data bytes, this control sequence has the effect of a no-operation. If the value of the control sequence length parameter is greater than four, that is, data bytes are provided, and if the value of RLENGTH is zero, no exception condition exists and the data bytes are ignored. If, however, the value of the control sequence length parameter is four and RLENGTH is not zero, exception condition EC-1F01 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue processing. If the character encoding is Unicode but the code points in the RPS are not valid Unicode data, exception condition EC-1A03 exists. The standard action is to skip the remainder of the code points in the RPS, repeat only the valid code point sequence, and continue processing. Architecture Note: If the length of RLENGTH is the same as the length of RPTDATA, the RPS control sequence has the same effect as the Transparent Data control sequence. It is recommended that the RPS control sequence not be used in this manner, and that the TRN control sequence be used instead.
PTOCA-4-350	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1A01...A double-byte font is active and the length of RPTDATA is an odd number.
PTOCA-4-351	EC-1A03...Invalid Unicode data. This can be caused by one of the following:
PTOCA-4-352	– A high-order surrogate code value was not immediately followed by a low-order surrogate code value. The high-order surrogate range is U+D800 through U+DBFF. – A low-order surrogate code value was not immediately preceded by a high-order surrogate code value. The low-order surrogate range is U+DC00 through U+DFFF. – An illegal UTF-8 byte sequence, as defined in the Unicode 3.2 Specification, was specified. For more information on illegal UTF-8 byte sequences, see Table 15. EC-1B01...A double-byte font is active and RLENGTH is an odd number.
PTOCA-4-353	EC-1901...The value of RLENGTH is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-354	EC-0103...A parameter value will cause part of a character's character box to be outside the object space,
PTOCA-4-355	and presentation is attempted. EC-1F01...The control sequence length parameter is four and RLENGTH is not zero.
PTOCA-4-356	Set Baseline Increment (SBI) The Set Baseline Increment control sequence specifies the increment to be added to the current baseline coordinate when a Begin Line control sequence is executed. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-357	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-358	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-359	UBIN LENGTH 4 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-360	CODE TYPE X'D0' – X'D1' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-361	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN INCRMENT X'0000' – X'7FFF' Increment M Y Y INCRMENT is a positive binary number expressed in measurement units. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. The PTOCA default value for INCRMENT should be the Default Baseline Increment of the default coded font for the device.
PTOCA-4-362	Semantics This control sequence specifies an increment, INCRMENT, in the positive B-direction from the current baseline coordinate position to a new established baseline coordinate position for subsequent presentation text in the current Presentation Text object. INCRMENT is applied when a Begin Line control sequence is executed. If the value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC- 1 101 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the value
PTOCA-4-363	Pragmatics The baseline coordinate position is incremented by INCRMENT after each Begin Line control sequence is processed. If the value of INCRMENT is zero, each line appears superimposed over the preceding line. This control sequence overrides the Baseline Increment initial text condition parameter that may occur in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor.
PTOCA-4-364	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception condition: EC-1 101...The value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-365	Set Coded Font Local (SCFL) The Set Coded Font Local control sequence activates a coded font and specifies the character attributes to be used. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-366	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-367	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-368	UBIN LENGTH 3 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-369	CODE TYPE X'F0' – X'F1' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-370	function type M N N 4 CODE LID X'00' – X'FE' Local identifier M Y Y
PTOCA-4-371	The PTOCA default value for the LID is X'00'.
PTOCA-4-372	Semantics This control sequence specifies a local identifier, LID, which is used by the controlling environment to access a coded font for presentation of subsequent text in the current Presentation Text object. The current presentation position is not changed by this control sequence. If the value of the LID is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. If the LID is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the control sequence and continue presentation with the active font determined according to the hierarchy. If the value of the LID is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-0C01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue presentation with the active coded font determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-373	Pragmatics The LID is equated to a coded font, character rotation, and font modification parameters by a mapping function in the controlling environment. Please see “Related Publications” and “Font Concepts” for font documentation. PTOCA expects the local identifier, LID, to be mapped to a global identifier. For example, this mapping could be accomplished in the following ways: The receiver provides internal mapping, using device defaults.
PTOCA-4-374	The controlling environment provides the mapping to the receiver.
PTOCA-4-375	If a mapping is not provided, exception condition EC-1802 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence, substitute a coded font determined according to the hierarchy, and continue processing. If the coded font specified by the mapping is not available to the receiver, exception condition EC-1802 exists. The standard action in this case is to substitute a coded font, determined according to the hierarchy, for the SCFL Control Sequence
PTOCA-4-376	specified coded font and continue processing. The PTOC A parameter specification hierarchy is defined in Table 9. If the text orientation is changed and the specified coded font is not compatible with the new orientation, when an attempt is made to present a character from the selected coded font, exception condition EC-3F02 exists. The standard action is to skip the presentation at this presentation position and use the active coded font determined according to the hierarchy. This results in the best possible presentation within the receiver's capability. In this case, any intercharacter adjustment is not applied. The measurement units used by the medium and those used by the coded font selected for presentation are assumed to be compatible. If they are not compatible, the standard action, when not superseded by the controlling environment, is to present a best fit of the character and continue processing. A best fit could result in no mark or unintelligible marks on the presentation surface. However, incompatible measurement units are not an exception condition in PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-377	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...The LID is missing.
PTOCA-4-378	EC-0C01...The value of the LID is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-379	EC-1802...A font mapping has not been provided.
PTOCA-4-380	EC-1802...The coded font specified by the mapping is not available to the receiver.
PTOCA-4-381	EC-3F02...The specified coded font is not compatible with the text orientation.
PTOCA-4-382	SCFL Control Sequence
PTOCA-4-383	Set Encrypted Alternate (SEA) The Set Encrypted Alternate control sequence contains the alternate text as a series of code points to be used if the decryption of the encrypted bytes in the ENC control fails. This data is not scanned for embedded control sequences. Alternate text will be used when the encrypted bytes in ENCDATA cannot be decrypted, either because: decryption is not available on the target device, the decryption fails during processing, or the KEYINFO key information required for decryption has not been defined using the Set Key Information (SKI) control. ### Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-384	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-385	UBIN LENGTH 6, 7–255 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-386	CODE TYPE X'9C' – X'9D' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-387	function type M N N 4-7 Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-388	CHAR ALTTEXT Not
PTOCA-4-389	applicable Alternate text to be used if decryption fails O N N The contents of ALTTEXT (if specified) are a character string of code points. ALTTEXT does not accept the default indicator, but X'F....F' is valid.
PTOCA-4-390	Semantics Alternate text is processed when an ENC decryption cannot be performed and ALTTEXT is substituted (see the ENC Semantics for a description of the details).
PTOCA-4-391	If the value of the LENGTH field is less than 6, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue processing.
PTOCA-4-392	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception condition: EC-1E01...LENGTH is not valid.
PTOCA-4-393	Set Extended Text Color (SEC) The Set Extended Text Color control sequence specifies a color value and defines the color space and encoding for that value. The specified color value is applied to foreground areas of the text presentation space. Foreground areas consist of the following: The stroked and filled areas of solid text characters, including overstrike characters; with hollow characters,
PTOCA-4-394	only the stroked portion of the character is considered foreground. The stroked area of a rule
PTOCA-4-395	The stroked area of an underscore
PTOCA-4-396	All other areas of the text presentation space are considered background. This is a modal control sequence. Note: Colors may be specified using the Set Text Color (STC) or the Set Extended Text Color (SEC) control sequences. Both STC and SEC can coexist in the same text object. The last issued control sequence determines the current text color in accordance with the rules defined for modal control sequences. For a definition of modal control sequences, see “Modal Control Sequences”.
PTOCA-4-397	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-398	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-399	UBIN LENGTH 14–16 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-400	CODE TYPE X'80' – X'81' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-401	function type M N N 4 Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-402	CODE COLSPCE Color space M N N
PTOCA-4-403	X'01' X'04' X'06' X'08' X'40' RGB CMYK Highlight color space CIELAB Standard OCA color space 6–9 Reserved; should be zero M N N 10 UBIN COLSIZE1 X'01' – X'08',
PTOCA-4-404	X'10' Number of bits in component 1, see color space definitions M N N 1 1 UBIN COLSIZE2 X'00' – X'08' Number of bits in
PTOCA-4-405	component 2, see color space definitions M N N 12 UBIN COLSIZE3 X'00' – X'08' Number of bits in
PTOCA-4-406	Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 13 UBIN COLSIZE4 X'00' – X'08' Number of bits in
PTOCA-4-407	component 4, see color space definitions M N N 14–(n-1) COL Value See
PTOCA-4-408	Semantics for details Color specifications M N N
PTOCA-4-409	Semantics COLSPCE is a code that defines the color space and the encoding for the color specification. If the color space is invalid or unsupported, exception condition EC-0E02 exists. The standard action is to use the device default color. Value Description X'01' RGBcolor space. The color value is specified with three components. Components 1, 2, and 3 are unsigned binary numbers that specify the red, green, and blue intensity values, in that order. COLSIZE1, COLSIZE2, and COLSIZE3 are non-zero and define the number of bits used to specify each component. COLSIZE4 is reserved and should be set to zero. The intensity range for the R, G, and Bcomponents is 0 to 1, which is mapped to the binary value range 0 to (2 ColSizeN - 1), where N=1,2,3.
PTOCA-4-410	plus percent shading is less than 100%, the remaining coverage is achieved with color of medium. COLSIZE3 = X'00' or X'08' and defines the number of bits used to specify component 3. A value of X'00' indicates that component 3 is not specified in the color value, in which case
PTOCA-4-411	the architected default for percent shading is 0%. A value of X'08' indicates that component 3 is specified in the color value. Implementation Note: The percent shading parameter is currently not supported in AFP environments. If the percent value for component 2 or component 3 is invalid, exception condition EC-0E04 exists. The standard action is to use the maximum valid percent value. COLSIZE4 is reserved and should be set to zero. This is a device-dependent color space. Architecture Notes: 1. The color that is rendered when a highlight color is specified is device dependent. For
PTOCA-4-412	presentation devices that support colors other than black, highlight color values in the range X'0001' to X'FFFF' may be mapped to any color. For bi-level devices, the color may be simulated with a graphic pattern. In addition, presentation devices may not support the % coverage and % shading parameters for highlight colors in PTOCA text. In that case, these parameters are simulated with 100% coverage and 0% shading, respectively. 2. If the specified highlight color is 'presentation device default', devices whose default color
PTOCA-4-413	is black use the percent coverage parameter, which is specified in component 2, to render a percent shading. 3. On printing devices, the color of medium is normally white, in which case a coverage of n
PTOCA-4-414	% results in adding (100-n)% white to the specified color, or tinting the color with (100-n)% white. Display devices may assume the color of medium to always be white and use this algorithm to render the specified coverage. 4. The highlight color space can also specify indexed colors when used in conjunction with a
PTOCA-4-415	Color Mapping Table (CMT) or an Indexed (IX) Color Management Resource (CMR). When used with an Indexed CMR, component 1 specifies a two-byte value that is the index into the CMR, and components 2 and 3 are ignored. Note that when both a CMT and Indexed CMRs are used, the CMT is always accessed first. To preserve compatibility with existing highlight color devices, indexed color values X'0000' – X'00FF' are reserved for existing highlight color applications and devices. That is, indexed colors values in the range X'0000' – X'00FF', assuming they are not mapped to a different color space in a CMT, are mapped directly to highlight colors. Indexed color values in the range X'0100' – X'FFFF', assuming they are not mapped to a different color space in a CMT, are used to access Indexed CMRs. For a description of the Color Mapping Table and Indexed CMRs in MO:DCA environments, see the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004. X'08' CIELABcolor space. The color value is specified with three components. Components 1, 2, and 3 are binary numbers that specify the L, a, b values, in that order, where L is the luminance and a and b are the chrominance dif ferences. Component 1 specifies the L value as an unsigned binary number; components 2 and 3 specify the a and b values as signed binary numbers. COLSIZE1, COLSIZE2, and COLSIZE3 are non-zero and define the number of bits used to specify each component. COLSIZE4 is reserved and should be set to zero. The range for the L component is 0 to 100, which is mapped to the binary value range 0 to (2 ColSize1 - 1). The range for the a and b components is -127 to +127, which is mapped to the binary
PTOCA-4-416	range -(2 ColSizeN-1 - 1) to +(2
PTOCA-4-417	Table 12 SEC Color Values (cont'd.) Value Color Red (R) Green (G) Blue (B) X'FF08' Color of medium — — — Notes: 1. The presentation-process default specified by X'0000' and X'FF00' is resolved as follows:
PTOCA-4-418	For PTOCA text data, it is the presentation device default
PTOCA-4-419	The color rendered on presentation devices that do not support white is device-dependent. For
PTOCA-4-420	example, some printers simulate with color of medium, which results in white if white media is used. 3. The presentation-process default specified by X'FF07' is resolved as the presentation device
PTOCA-4-421	default. This color value is also known in GOCA as neutral white for compatibility with display devices. 4. The value X'FFFF' is not defined in the Standard OCA Color Value Table but is used by some
PTOCA-4-422	objects as a default indicator as follows: For PTOCA text data, X'FFFF' may be specified in the Set Text Color (STC) control sequence to
PTOCA-4-423	indicate that the PTOCA default hierarchy is used to generate the color value. Note that X'FFFF' is not supported in the Set Extended Text Color (SEC) control sequence. 5. While the RGB values in the table can be used to render the OCA named colors, many
PTOCA-4-424	The subset may limit the parameter ranges permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data-stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-425	Pragmatics If the receiver does not support the specified color value exception condition EC-0E03 exists. The standard action in this case is to use the presentation device default color.
PTOCA-4-426	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0E02...Invalid or unsupported color space.
PTOCA-4-427	EC-0E03...Invalid or unsupported color value.
PTOCA-4-428	EC-0E04...Invalid percent value.
PTOCA-4-429	EC-0E05...Invalid or unsupported number of bits in a color component.
PTOCA-4-430	Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA) The Set Intercharacter Adjustment control sequence specifies additional increment or decrement between graphic characters. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-431	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-432	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-433	UBIN LENGTH 4–5 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-434	CODE TYPE X'C2' – X'C3' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-435	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN ADJSTMNT X'0000' – X'7FFF' Adjustment M Y Y 6 CODE DIRECTION X'00' – X'01' Direction O Y Y
PTOCA-4-436	is that the non-incrementing character is coupled with the following graphic character. This accomplishes an overstrike function, and the intercharacter adjustment is applied to the coupled characters as a unit. Intercharacter adjustment is not applied before or after the following: A space character or variable space character
PTOCA-4-437	A Begin Line control sequence
PTOCA-4-438	A Relative Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-439	An Absolute Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-440	Non-presenting characters are graphic characters except when identified as the designated variable space character. Intercharacter adjustment is inserted between the characters that form a word, but not between words. That is, intercharacter adjustment is applied only when in inword mode. Inword mode is entered after any incrementing character has been processed. Inword mode is exited after any word delimiter has been processed. The following are word delimiters: The space character or variable space character
PTOCA-4-441	Begin Line control sequences
PTOCA-4-442	Relative Move Inline control sequences
PTOCA-4-443	Absolute Move Inline control sequences
PTOCA-4-444	Application Note: The following code points are normally used for the variable space character: X'40' in EBCDIC single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-445	X'20' in ASCII single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-446	X'4040' in EBCDIC double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-447	X'2020' in ASCII double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-448	The following code points are used for the variable space character in TrueType/OpenType fonts that use a Unicode (UTF-16) encoding: X'0020'
PTOCA-4-449	X'00A0'
PTOCA-4-450	If the value of ADJSTMNT is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. If the value of DIRECTION is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. If the value of ADJSTMNT or DIRECTION is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1201 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the parameter values determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-451	Pragmatics If the value of ADJSTMNT is zero, no additional intercharacter increment or decrement appears between graphic characters. In this case, DIRECTION is optional, and the SIA control sequence does not change the following: The current presentation position
PTOCA-4-452	The current I-unit value
PTOCA-4-453	The current inline margin
PTOCA-4-454	The current intercharacter increment value
PTOCA-4-455	The current intercharacter decrement value
PTOCA-4-456	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception condition: EC-1201...The value of ADJSTMNT or DIRECTION is not supported or is not in the range specified by
PTOCA-4-457	Set Inline Margin (SIM) The Set Inline Margin control sequence specifies the position of an inline margin. This is a modal control sequence. ### Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-458	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-459	UBIN LENGTH 4 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-460	CODE TYPE X'C0' – X'C1' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-461	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN DSPLCMNT X'0000' – X'7FFF' Displacement M Y Y DSPLCMNT is a positive binary number expressed in measurement units. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. The PTOCA default value for DSPLCMNT is the B-axis, that is, $Ic$ is zero. ### Semantics This control sequence specifies a displacement, DSPLCMNT, from the B-axis in the I-direction that is to be applied when a Begin Line control sequence is processed in the current Presentation Text object. If the value of DSPLCMNT is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. If DSPLCMNT is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to ignore the control sequence and continue presentation with the Inline Margin that was in effect prior to this control sequence. If the value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1001 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation. This control sequence does not change the current addressable position.
PTOCA-4-462	Pragmatics The current addressable position is at the inline margin after each Begin Line control sequence is executed. If the value of DSPLCMNT is zero, the inline margin is at the B-axis.
PTOCA-4-463	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...DSPLCMNT is missing.
PTOCA-4-464	EC-1001...The value of DSPLCMNT is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-465	Set Key Information (SKI) The Set Key Information control sequence provides encryption key information to be used with Encrypted Data (ENC) controls. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-466	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-467	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-468	UBIN LENGTH 6, 7–255 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-469	CODE TYPE X'9A' – X'9B' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-470	function type M N N 4–7 Reserved; should be zero M N N 8–256 UNDF KEYINFO Any value Key information O N N The data type of the contents of KEYINFO is UNDF (undefined). KEYINFO does not accept the default indicator, but X'F....F' is valid.
PTOCA-4-471	Semantics KEYINFO is a collection of bytes that are used by the decryption method to perform decryption on encrypted text specified in the ENC control. The contents and length of this field will vary based on the encryption implementation, with different bytes used for diffe rent things. For example, when a Hardware Security Module (HSM) is used, the key information might consist of a slot ID, key name, key label, and so forth. Diffe rent decryption implementations might use diffe rent information. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-472	chain have their KEYINFO fields concatenated together to form key information that can be much longer than 249 bytes. Consecutive, in this case, means the SKI controls have no intervening PTOCA controls between
PTOCA-4-473	them. Every single SKI control on its own, or every set of consecutive SKI controls, is handled as a normal modal control, and simply replaces the previous encryption key information, for use in subsequent ENC controls. Note: It is poor security practice for the data bytes in KEYINFO to contain the encryption key used to originally encrypt the data, since including these bytes in the print stream defeats the purpose of encrypting it in the first place. KEYINFO is initially set to no value. If KEYINFO is defined, it can be reset back to no value by specifying a SKI with the KEYINFO field omitted (LENGTH = 6). A SKI with LENGTH=6 resets the KEYINFO field back to no value even if the SKIhas other consecutive SKIs either before or after it. Consecutive SKIs before it, if any, are effe ctively ignored, while consecutive SKIs after it, if any, begin a new KEYINFO definition.
PTOCA-4-474	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...LENGTH is not valid.
PTOCA-4-475	EC-9D01...Decryption is not available on this device.
PTOCA-4-476	Set Text Color (STC) The Set Text Color control sequence specifies a color attribute for the foreground areas of the text presentation space. Foreground areas consist of the following: The stroked and filled areas of solid text characters, including overstrike characters; with hollow characters,
PTOCA-4-477	only the stroked portion of the character is considered foreground. The stroked area of a rule
PTOCA-4-478	The stroked area of an underscore
PTOCA-4-479	All other areas of the text presentation space are considered background. This is a modal control sequence. Note: Colors may be specified using the Set Text Color (STC) or the Set Extended Text Color (SEC) control sequences. Both STC and SEC can coexist in the same text object. The last issued control sequence determines the current text color in accordance with the rules defined for modal control sequences. For a definition of modal control sequences, see “Modal Control Sequences”.
PTOCA-4-480	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-481	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-482	UBIN LENGTH 4, 5 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-483	CODE TYPE X'74' – X'75' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-484	function type M N N 4–5 CODE FRGCOLOR See
PTOCA-4-485	Semantics section Foreground color M Y Y 6 Retired parameter, see
PTOCA-4-486	Architecture Note, also see “Retired Parameters” on. O The PTOCA default value for FRGCOLOR is X'FF07'. Please see the pragmatics section for further details. Architecture Note: Pre-year 2000 applications and printers support an optional PRECISION parameter in byte 6. This parameter has been retired. It should not be generated by new applications, and should be
PTOCA-4-487	ignored by new printers. For a definition of this parameter, see “Retired Parameters”.
PTOCA-4-488	The following table defines the valid color values used to specify named colors. The table also specifies the RGB values that can be used for each named color, assuming that each component is specified with 8 bits and that the component intensity range 0 to 1 is mapped to the binary value range 0 to 255. Table 13. STC Color Values Value Color Red (R) Green (G) Blue (B) X'0000' or X'FF00' Presentation-process default; see Note 1 X'0001' or X'FF01' Blue 0 0 255 X'0002' or X'FF02' Red 255 0 0 X'0003' or X'FF03' Pink/Magenta 255 0 255 X'0004' or X'FF04' Green 0 255 0 X'0005' or X'FF05' T urquoise/cyan 0 255 255 X'0006' or X'FF06' Y ellow 255 255 0 X'0007' White; see Note 2 255 255 255 X'0008' Black 0 0 0 X'0009' Dark blue 0 0 170 X'000A' Orange 255 128 0 X'000B' Purple 170 0 170 X'000C' Dark green 0 146 0 X'000D' Dark turquoise 0 146 170 X'000E' Mustard 196 160 32 X'000F' Gray 131 131 131 X'0010' Brown 144 48 0 X'FF07' Presentation-process default; see Note 3 — — — X'FF08' Color of medium — — — X'FFFF' Default indicator — — — Notes: 1. The presentation-process default specified by X'0000' and X'FF00' is resolved as follows:
PTOCA-4-489	For PTOCA text data, it is the presentation device default
PTOCA-4-490	The color rendered on presentation devices that do not support white is device-dependent. For example, some
PTOCA-4-491	printers simulate with color of medium, which results in white if white media is used. 3. The presentation-process default specified by X'FF07' is resolved as the presentation device default. This color
PTOCA-4-492	value is also known in GOCA as neutral white for compatibility with display devices. 4. The value X'FFFF' is not defined in the Standard OCA Color Value Table but is used by some objects as a default
PTOCA-4-493	indicator as follows: For PTOCA text data, X'FFFF' may be specified in the Set Text Color (STC) control sequence to indicate that the
PTOCA-4-494	PTOCA default hierarchy is used to generate the color value. Note that X'FFFF' is not supported in the Set Extended Text Color (SEC) control sequence. 5. While the RGB values in the table can be used to render the OCA named colors, many implementations are and
PTOCA-4-495	The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-496	Pragmatics The presentation process default color attribute value (FRGCOLOR = X'FFFF') is determined hierarchically. The following order applies: 1. Value set by Text Color initial text condition parameter in descriptor
PTOCA-4-497	PTOCA default X'FF07'
PTOCA-4-498	The device default value is the receiver ’ s default. For example, characters, rules, and underscores will be presented in black on a receiver which supports only black. The receiver ’ s best possible value means that if the receiver has limited color capabilities, then it may substitute a color it supports for one it does not support. For example, the receiver may substitute red for pink, blue for turquoise, and so forth. The color attribute values X'FF00' to X'FF06' are translated to X'0000' to X'0006' and treated exactly like those colors. The PTOCA default value of X'FF07', is the device default. For example, characters, rules, and underscores will be presented in black on a device which supports only black. A color attribute value of X'FF08' means that the receiver's default background color should be used for the foreground color. This provides an erase function. ### Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception condition: EC-5803...The value of FRGCOLOR is invalid, or the specified color is not supported.
PTOCA-4-499	Architecture Notes: 1. The MO:DCA environment supports a Color Mapping Table (CMT) that may be used to map colors in a
PTOCA-4-500	PTOCA object to other colors. When a CMT is active, valid FRGCOLOR values are mapped to their target values. The retired PRECISION parameter, if supported, is processed for the target values. 2. The IPDS environment allows a presentation device to implement limited simulated color support for
PTOCA-4-501	Set Text Orientation (STO) The Set Text Orientation control sequence establishes the I-direction and B-direction for the subsequent text. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-502	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-503	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-504	UBIN LENGTH 6 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-505	CODE TYPE X'F6' – X'F7' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-506	function type M N N 4–5 CODE IORNTION See
PTOCA-4-507	Semantics section I-axis orientation M Y Y 6–7 CODE BORNTION See
PTOCA-4-508	Semantics section B-axis orientation M Y Y The PTOCA default for IORNTION is zero. The PTOCA default for BORNTION is 90.
PTOCA-4-509	Semantics This control sequence specifies the I-axis and B-axis orientations with respect to the $Xp$ -axis for the current Presentation Text object. The orientations are rotational values expressed in degrees and minutes. IORNTION and BORNTION have the same format. Each is a two-byte, three-part binary code of the form ABC. A is a nine-bit binary number (bits 0 - 8) which provides from 0 through 359 degrees. Values from 360
PTOCA-4-510	through 51 1 are invalid. B is a six-bit binary number (bits 9 - 14) which provides from 0 through 59 minutes. Values from 60 through
PTOCA-4-511	are invalid.
PTOCA-4-512	C is a one-bit reserved field (bit 15) which must be 0.
PTOCA-4-513	Figure 12. Location of I,B Origin If the inline direction changes or the origin of the B-axis changes, the inline margin also changes. The new inline margin is parallel to the new B-axis, and it is displaced in the new I-direction from the new B-axis according to the value of the Inline Margin parameter. If the value of IORNTION or BORNTION is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. If IORNTION or BORNTION is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to assume an orientation with the I-axis parallel to the $Xp$ -axis, and the B-axis parallel to the $Yp$ -axis. If IORNTION and BORNTION are identical, exception condition EC-0F01 exists. The standard action is to assume an orientation with the I-axis parallel to the $Xp$ -axis, and the B-axis parallel to the $Yp$ -axis. ### Pragmatics When the text orientation is changed, the text appears to rotate about the current presentation position, which is an $Xp$ ,$Yp$ coordinate. Please see Figure 13 for examples of text orientation and character rotation. When such a change occurs, the current presentation position is not changed, but the values of $Ic$ and $Bc$ are adjusted to correspond to the current presentation position relative to the new orientation. If neither the I-direction nor the B-direction is parallel to the $Xp$ -direction or the $Yp$ -direction, exception condition EC-0F01 exists. The standard action is to set the I-direction parallel to the $Xp$ -direction and the B-direction parallel to the $Yp$ -direction. Orientations other than 0,90 are valid, but may be constrained by receiver limitations or by parameters in the controlling environment. If the orientation is not supported by the receiver, exception condition EC-0F01 exists. The standard action is to use 0,90 degrees for the orientation. This exception condition and standard action also apply to values for IORNTION and BORNTION not within the range specified by PTOCA. Architecture Notes: 1. The following remain as previously specified:
PTOCA-4-514	The current presentation position, an $Xp$,$Yp$ coordinate,
PTOCA-4-515	The current I-unit value,
PTOCA-4-516	The current inline margin,
PTOCA-4-517	The current intercharacter increment value,
PTOCA-4-518	The current intercharacter decrement value,
PTOCA-4-519	The current B-unit value,
PTOCA-4-520	The current baseline increment value,
PTOCA-4-521	The current coded font.
PTOCA-4-522	The following will change:
PTOCA-4-523	The $Xp$
PTOCA-4-524	$Yp$ -axis from which inline margin is measured (that is, the inline margin appears to rotate). Font character rotations appropriate to the new orientation are used.
PTOCA-4-525	Presentation position should be respecified if subsequent text is to be positioned elsewhere in the
PTOCA-4-526	Presentation Text space. Other modal parameter values should be respecified if they are more appropriate to the new orientation.
PTOCA-4-527	A new coded font should be specified:
PTOCA-4-528	– If the current coded font is not valid in the new text orientation, – If it is desired that the graphic characters be rotated in proper orientation with respect to the new baseline. 3. If the Presentation Text object measurement units specified for the $Xp$
PTOCA-4-529	-axis are different from the measurement units specified for the $Yp$ -axis, the result of a Set Text Orientation control sequence may be unexpected and use of a Set Text Orientation control sequence should be avoided.
PTOCA-4-530	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...IORNTION or BORNTION is missing.
PTOCA-4-531	EC-0F01...IORNTION and BORNTION are identical.
PTOCA-4-532	EC-0F01...IORNTION or BORNTION not parallel to $Xp$
PTOCA-4-533	-axis or $Yp$ -axis. EC-0F01...IORNTION and BORNTION not supported by receiver.
PTOCA-4-534	Set V ariable Space Character Increment (SVI) The Set V ariable Space Character Increment control sequence specifies the increment for a variable space character. This is a modal control sequence.
PTOCA-4-535	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-536	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-537	UBIN LENGTH 4 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-538	CODE TYPE X'C4' – X'C5' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-539	function type M N N 4–5 SBIN INCRMENT X'0000' – X'7FFF' Increment M Y Y INCRMENT is a positive number expressed in measurement units. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-540	Semantics This control sequence specifies an increment, INCRMENT, for the variable space character. The increment is in the I-direction from the presentation position of the variable space character to the addressable position for the next graphic character or control sequence for subsequent text in the current Presentation Text object. This control sequence does not change the current presentation position. To return to the current coded font's default value for the variable space character increment, set INCRMENT to the default indicator. If the current coded font does not have such a default value, INCRMENT is set to the character increment for the default variable space character. If INCRMENT is omitted, exception condition EC-1E01 exists. The standard action is to continue with the presentation using the standard action value for the variable space character increment. If the value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-1701 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. Please refer to the Pragmatics section for details. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-541	The code point used for the variable space character is specified, either implicitly or explicitly, by the active font. In this case, the default value for INCRMENT is the value specified by the active font in its current orientation. The value is obtained in this order: 1. The current variable space character increment
PTOCA-4-542	The default variable space character increment of the active coded font
PTOCA-4-543	The character increment of the default variable space character code point
PTOCA-4-544	When the value of INCRMENT changes because of changes in the font or the SVIcontrol sequences, the new value is carried but is not used until the variable space character is enabled. The variable space character increment is not effe ctive for other graphic characters that are not presented, nor for graphic characters that make no marks. Architecture Note: The following remain as previously specified: The current presentation position, an $Xp$,$Yp$ coordinate
PTOCA-4-545	The current I-unit value
PTOCA-4-546	The current inline margin,
PTOCA-4-547	The current intercharacter increment value
PTOCA-4-548	The current intercharacter decrement value
PTOCA-4-549	The current B-unit value
PTOCA-4-550	The current baseline increment value
PTOCA-4-551	The current coded font
PTOCA-4-552	Application Note: The following code points are normally used for the variable space character: X'40' in EBCDIC single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-553	X'20' in ASCII single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-554	X'4040' in EBCDIC double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-555	X'2020' in ASCII double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-556	The following code points are used for the variable space character in TrueType/OpenType fonts that use a Unicode (UTF-16) encoding: X'0020'
PTOCA-4-557	X'00A0'
PTOCA-4-558	Application Note: The Set V ariable Space Character Increment (SVI) control sequence is modal, but is not an initial text condition. For text major text, SVI is not reset by AFP presentation servers when a MO:DCA BPT structured field is encountered, and therefore later text on the same page will inherit any SVI set previously on the page. If no SVI is specified in a page, then the default variable space character increment of the active coded font is used.
PTOCA-4-559	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1E01...INCRMENT is missing
PTOCA-4-560	EC-1701...The value of INCRMENT is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.EC-1E01EC-
PTOCA-4-561	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-4-562	Temporary Baseline Move (TBM) The Temporary Baseline Move control sequence changes the position of the baseline without changing the established baseline.
PTOCA-4-563	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-564	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-565	UBIN LENGTH 3, 4, 6 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-566	CODE TYPE X'78' – X'79' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-567	function type M N N 4 CODE DIRECTION X'00' – X'03' Direction M Y Y
PTOCA-4-568	BITS PRECISION X'00' – X'01' Precision O Y Y
PTOCA-4-569	6–7 SBIN INCRMENT X'0000' – X'7FFF' Temporary baseline increment O Y Y INCRMENT is a positive number expressed in measurement units. The range for this parameter assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. The PTOCA default value for INCRMENT is 1/2 the baseline increment value. The PTOC A default value for DIRECTION and PRECISION is zero.
PTOCA-4-570	Semantics This control sequence does one of the following: Change the current baseline coordinate by the amount specified by INCRMENT in the direction specified by
PTOCA-4-571	DIRECTION Return the baseline coordinate to the established baseline coordinate position
PTOCA-4-572	The following equations apply to DIRECTION: If DIRECTION = 0: $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ If DIRECTION = 1: $B{cnew}$ = $B{est}$ If DIRECTION = 2: $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ + INCRMENT If DIRECTION = 3: $B{cnew}$ = $Bc$ - INCRMENT
PTOCA-4-573	In all cases: $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ PRECISION is bit-encoded as follows. Bits 0-6 Bits 0-6 are reserved. They must be set to B'0' by generators, and ignored by receivers. Bit 7 If bit 7 is B'0', the receiver must accurately place and represent the character using the coded font that is active when the control sequence is executed. In this case, the movement of the baseline is not simulated, and the character presented on the shifted baseline is the same as the characters used in the surrounding text. That is, it is not a character specially designed for subscripting or superscripting. However, this does not prohibit changing the coded font. If this bit is B'0', the intent is to ensure that the receiver has the word processing capability of producing formal documents. If bit 7 is B'1', the movement of the baseline may be simulated using specially designed subscript or superscript characters which appear smaller than the surrounding text. If the value of INCRMENT, PRECISION, or DIRECTION is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. If the value of INCRMENT, PRECISION, or DIRECTION is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-9803 exists. The standard action is to ignore this control sequence and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. Please see the Pragmatics section for details. The subset may limit the range permitted in this control sequence. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data- stream documentation.
PTOCA-4-574	Pragmatics How TBM operates:
PTOCA-4-575	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-4-576	moved farther from the established baseline coordinate. A second TBM with magnitude equal to the first but opposite direction cancels the effect of the first TBM and terminates the temporary baseline function. The Temporary Baseline Increment parameter is modal. That is, once it is set, it remains set until it is changed by another TBM control sequence. It is not necessary to generate a TBM control sequence in order to give this parameter a value. The parameter is required only if its value is to be changed. If a TBM control sequence does not include INCRMENT or specifies the default indicator for INCRMENT, the default value is used. The default is 1/2 the current baseline increment. The temporary baseline may be canceled, that is, reset to the established baseline coordinate position, by specifying the “Return to Established Baseline” function. This is specified by setting DIRECTION equal to X'01'. If a TBM control sequence is processed with DIRECTION set to X'01' when a temporary baseline has not been established, the result is a no-operation. If a TBM control sequence specifies the Return to Established Baseline function but includes the Temporary Baseline Increment parameter INCRMENT, the baseline coordinate is returned to the established baseline coordinate position, and INCRMENT is changed to the new value specified. PRECISION has no effect on the Return to Established Baseline function. The temporary baseline function is terminated if the temporary baseline coordinate coincides with the established baseline coordinate, that is, when the established baseline and the current baseline are equal at the end of processing the TBM control sequence. Therefore, creating a temporary baseline on one side of the established baseline followed by another temporary baseline on the other side of the established baseline without terminating the temporary baseline field is possible by changing the value of INCRMENT. How TBM affects other control sequences:
PTOCA-4-577	The temporary baseline field is not canceled by any other control sequences. Here are some examples: A Begin Line control sequence is processed relative to the established baseline coordinate position, not the temporary baseline coordinate position. Following the processing of a Begin Line control sequence, new baseline coordinate positions are determined. The Baseline Increment is added to the current baseline coordinate position to provide a new current baseline position. The Baseline Increment is also added to the established baseline coordinate position to provide a new established baseline position. Following the processing of a Begin Line control sequence, the temporary baseline is continued until a terminating TBM control sequence ends the temporary baseline function. A Relative Move Baseline control sequence is processed relative to the established baseline coordinate position, not the temporary baseline coordinate position. Following the processing of a Relative Move Baseline control sequence, new baseline coordinate positions are determined. The relative baseline increment is added to the current baseline coordinate position to provide a new current baseline position. The relative baseline increment is also added to the established baseline coordinate position to provide a new established baseline position. Following execution of a Relative Move Baseline control sequence, the temporary baseline is continued until a terminating TBM control sequence ends the temporary baseline function. How TBM uses the PRECISION parameter:
PTOCA-4-578	If a receiver implements only the substitution method and PRECISION is set to X'00', exception condition EC-9803 exists. The standard action is to perform the substitution method. Furthermore, if a receiver using the substitution method cannot generate the necessary substitution character, exception condition EC- 9803 exists. The standard action is to present the requested character at the established baseline
PTOCA-4-579	coordinate. It is not an exception if a TBM control sequence with PRECISION set to X'01' is encountered by a receiver which implements only the actual placement method. If a receiver supports the substitution method in addition to the actual placement method, setting PRECISION to X'01' causes selection of the substitution method. PRECISION is not a modal parameter. However, if another TBM control sequence that does not terminate the temporary baseline function is received, and PRECISION is not specified, then the current value of PRECISION is assumed. If the value of PRECISION is changed from X'00' to X'01' or from X'01' to X'00', the precision change must be honored according to the rules for PRECISION as indicated in the semantics. How TBM relates to underscore and overstrike:
PTOCA-4-580	For receivers that support the actual placement method, the baseline position of characters resulting from the underscore function is the established baseline. The baseline position of characters resulting from the overstrike function is the current baseline, that is, the overstriking characters follow the temporary baseline. If an overstrike or underscore function continues after the temporary baseline function is terminated, no exception condition exists. The corresponding function continues relative to the current baseline, which is equal to the established baseline. For receivers that support only the substitution method, the overstrike and underscore functions occur relative to the established baseline. Miscellaneous TBM exception conditions:
PTOCA-4-581	A receiver that supports the actual placement method for the TBM control sequence establishes the maximum temporary baseline displacement that it can support. If the Temporary Baseline Increment parameter exceeds the limits supported by the receiver, exception condition EC-9803 exists. The standard action is to use the established maximum limit that was exceeded as the standard action value for this parameter. More than one TBM control sequence without an intervening termination, such as a TBM of equal magnitude and opposite direction, or a TBM specifying Return to Established Baseline, is called multi- offsetting. Multi-offsetting support is required by PTOCA for receivers that support the actual placement method. It is not required to know the number of multi-offsets that have been accepted. Since receivers that support the substitution method do not physically create the temporary baseline, they cannot support multi-offset. If a multi-offset TBM is received by a substitution method receiver, exception condition EC-9803 exists. The standard action is to present according to the substitution method. If processing a TBM causes any portion of a character box on the current baseline to exceed the boundaries of the object space and presentation is attempted, exception condition EC-0103 exists. The standard action is to continue processing without presenting characters until the addressable point specified is valid for use as a presentation position, and then start presenting again. While processing without presenting characters, the current presentation position is maintained as though the affe cted characters were being presented.
PTOCA-4-582	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-9803...The value of INCRMENT, PRECISION, or DIRECTION is not supported or is not in the range
PTOCA-4-583	specified by PTOCA. EC-9803...The PRECISION parameterspecifies the actual placement method but the receiver does not
PTOCA-4-584	support it. EC-9803...A receiver using the substitution method cannot generate the required substitution character.
PTOCA-4-585	EC-9803...For a receiver that uses the actual placement method, the INCRMENT parameter exceeds the
PTOCA-4-586	physical limit. EC-9803...A multi-offset TBM control sequence is received by a receiver that uses the substitution method.
PTOCA-4-587	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-4-588	EC-0103...The control sequence will cause part of a character's character box to be outside of the object
PTOCA-4-589	Transparent Data (TRN) The Transparent Data control sequence contains a sequence of code points that are presented without a scan for embedded control sequences.
PTOCA-4-590	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-591	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-592	UBIN LENGTH 2–255 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-593	CODE TYPE X'DA' – X'DB' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-594	function type M N N 4–256 CHAR TRNDATA Not applicable Transparent data O N N The contents of TRNDATA are unknown. TRNDATA does not accept the default indicator, but X'F....F' is valid.
PTOCA-4-595	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-4-596	The data length must be an even number for double-byte fonts. If the Transparent Data control sequence length is an odd number when a double-byte font is active, exception condition EC-1A01 exists. The standard action is to process the Transparent Data control sequence up to the last byte, skip the odd byte, and continue processing. If the character encoding is Unicode but the code points in the TRN are not valid Unicode data, exception condition EC-1A03 exists. The standard action is to skip the remainder of the code points in the TRN and continue processing. ### Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0103...The control sequence will cause part of a character's character box to be outside the object
PTOCA-4-597	space, and presentation is attempted. EC-1A01...The control sequence length is an odd number, but a double-byte font is active.
PTOCA-4-598	EC-1A03...Invalid Unicode data. This can be caused by one of the following:
PTOCA-4-599	Underscore (USC) The Underscore control sequence identifies text fields that are to be underscored.
PTOCA-4-600	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-601	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-602	UBIN LENGTH 3 Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-603	CODE TYPE X'76' – X'77' Control sequence
PTOCA-4-604	function type M N N 4 BITS BYPSIDEN See
PTOCA-4-605	Semantics section Bypass identifiers M Y Y BYPSIDEN is a binary field with no measurement units. The PTOCA default is X'01', which means no bypass is in effect. ### Semantics Underscore is accomplished with a pair of USC control sequences. Underscore is activated with a beginning USC with a non-zero value for BYPSIDEN bits 4-7. Underscore is deactivated with an ending USC with a zero value for BYPSIDEN bits 4-7. This control sequence immediately precedes the field of text to be underscored, which is called the underscore field. The control sequence specifies that text bounded by the two USC control sequences is to be underscored, and it specifies which controlled inline white space within that text is to be underscored. The underscore field is delimited by a beginning USC control sequence and either an ending USC control sequence or the end of the Presentation Text object. The underscore field is a sequential string of text, that is, graphic characters or control sequences. BYPSIDEN specifies which controlled inline white space within the underscore field is to be underscored. Controlled inline white space is that area of the presented line that contains no visible material due to movement of the presentation position in the I-direction caused by the following: Absolute Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-606	Relative Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-607	Space character or variable space character
PTOCA-4-608	Application Note: The following code points are normally used for the variable space character: X'40' in EBCDIC single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-609	X'20' in ASCII single-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-610	X'4040' in EBCDIC double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-611	X'2020' in ASCII double-byte code pages
PTOCA-4-612	The following code points are used for the variable space character in TrueType/OpenType fonts that use a Unicode (UTF-16) encoding: X'0020'
PTOCA-4-613	X'00A0'
PTOCA-4-614	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-4-615	Movement of the current inline position in the I-direction to or through a presentation position that already contains material to be underscored creates controlled inline white space for the entire move in the I-direction. Not all inline white space is controlled. White space resulting from non-printing characters (other than space characters or variable space characters) within the character set, from substitution of non-printing characters for unsupported characters, from intercharacter adjustment, or from the inline margin is not considered controlled inline white space. Inline moves that cause the current addressable position to move in a direction opposite to the inline direction, that is, in the negative inline direction, do not cause underscore. BYPSIDEN is bit encoded as follows. BIT MEANING 0-3 Reserved, that is, set to 0 by generators and ignored by receivers
PTOCA-4-616	Bypass Relative Move Inline
PTOCA-4-617	Bypass Absolute Move Inline
PTOCA-4-618	Bypass space characters and variable space characters
PTOCA-4-619	No Bypass in effect
PTOCA-4-620	Bits 0-3, Reserved Reserved bits are set to 0 by generators and ignored by receivers. Bit 4, Bypass Relative Move Inline A value of B'0' in this bit indicates that the controlled white space generated as a result of a Relative Move Inline control sequence is to be underscored. A value of B'1' in this bit indicates that such controlled white space is not to be underscored. It should be bypassed. Bit 5, Bypass Absolute Move Inline A value of B'0' in this bit indicates that the controlled white space generated as a result of an Absolute Move Inline control sequence is to be underscored. A value of B'1' in this bit indicates that such controlled white space is not to be underscored. It should be bypassed. Bit 6, Bypass space characters A value of B'0' in this bit indicates that the controlled white space generated as a result of space characters or variable space characters is to be underscored. A value of B'1' in this bit indicates that such controlled white space is not to be underscored. It should be bypassed. Bit 7, No Bypass in Effect A value of B'0' in this bit activates the other bypass flags. A value of B'1' in this bit indicates that the other bypass flags are overridden, and that all text and white space bounded by the USC pair should be underscored. If the value of BYPSIDEN is the default indicator, a value is obtained from the hierarchy. Please see Table 9. Implementation Note: Most IPDS printers have implemented X'FF' as the default indicator, which results in BYPSIDEN = X'01' - no bypass in effect. However, it could be argued that the proper default indicator is X'0F', since BYPSIDEN bits 0-3 are reserved, should be set to zero by generators, and should be ignored by receivers. To avoid confusion, it is strongly recommended that a default indicator not be used for this parameter, and that the value X'01' is specified directly if the default is desired. An underscore area is that portion of the underscore field for which text is actually underscored. An underscore area is delimited by the addressable position in the following cases. A beginning USC
PTOCA-4-621	Either end of bypassed controlled inline white space
PTOCA-4-622	Either end of a baseline move, which may be for the established baseline or for a temporary baseline
PTOCA-4-623	The beginning of negative changes in the presentation position caused by inline moves or negative
PTOCA-4-624	intercharacter adjustments Boundaries where violation causes truncation
PTOCA-4-625	An ending USC
PTOCA-4-626	The end of the Presentation Text object
PTOCA-4-627	The dimension in the positive I-direction of the underscore field is defined by the minimum and maximum I- coordinates specified between the underscore area delimiters. White space resulting from the application of the inline margin is underscored only if this area is entered by means of an inline move.
PTOCA-4-628	Unicode Complex Text (UCT) Architecture Note: The recommended method for rendering Unicode complex text is to use GLC chains. With that method, the UCT may optionally be specified within a GLC chain as a carrier for metadata that specifies the original Unicode code points and control information describing how those code points may be rendered. In that usage, the UCT does not cause any characters to be rendered. Applications can use the UCT in GLC chains to “virtually“ render the code points in order to better correlate substrings of glyph runs with their corresponding code points. The use of the UCT as a stand-alone control sequence to render complex text has not been implemented widely and is not supported in IPDS environments. The Unicode Complex Text (UCT) control sequence marks the start of a sequence of Unicode code points. This sequence starts with the first byte following the end of the UCT control sequence and ends with the last byte identified by the complex text length parameter in the control sequence. All bytes in this sequence are processed as code points without a scan for embedded control sequences. There is no odd function type defined for the UCT, therefore the UCT can be part of a chain of control sequences but will always terminate the chain. If the active font is a data-object font and the data is encoded in a Unicode-based character encoding such as UTF-8 or UTF-16, the code points in the text that follows UCT can be processed as Unicode complex text. Under the following conditions the code points cannot be processed as Unicode complex text and instead are processed by the presentation device as if they were within a TRN control sequence, in which case all UCT control information is ignored: the active font is not a data-object font
PTOCA-4-629	the data is not encoded in a Unicode-based character encoding
PTOCA-4-630	the writing mode is vertical, as determined by a font character rotation of 90° or 270°
PTOCA-4-631	The UCT can be used in two ways. 1. When the UCT is specified within a GLC chain, that is when it is chained from a GAR or a GOR, it is used
PTOCA-4-632	to identify the code points rendered by the glyphs in the GLC chain. In that case, the code points following the UCT are not rendered, since the corresponding glyph IDs are rendered by the GLC chain. How much of the UCT controls are processed by the receiver to correlate code points to glyphs is device-dependent. If bidi processing and glyph processing are enabled within the UCT, a receiver may choose to process all of the UCT controls to actually lay out the code points in order to more closely associate code points with rendered glyphs. Or a receiver may choose to ignore all of the UCT controls, in which case the association of code points with glyph IDs can be more coarse. Processing of the UCT has no effect on the current inline position, $Ic$ , or on any other PTOCA environment controls. 2. When the UCT is specified outside a GLC chain (a “stand-alone“ UCT), it is used to process and render the
PTOCA-4-633	code points that follow. Architecture Note: The processing and rendering of a UCT outside a GLC chain is not part of the PTOC A PT4 function set. Not all presentation devices support this function; consult the appropriate product documentation. IPDS printers generate an exception when a UCT is specified outside a GLC chain. Some IPDS printers, under control of an environment-specified text fidelity control, will render the UCT code points in a one-to-one manner. Rendering complex text involves two types of special processing: bidirectional (bidi) layout processing. When the writing mode is horizontal, as determined by a character
PTOCA-4-634	Application Note: It is strongly recommended that the logical (storage) order of Unicode text strings be preserved when such strings are placed into text objects. This will allow the text, when carried in an interchange format such as a MO:DCA document, to be interchanged among applications that support text processing functions such as searching, sorting, and indexing. If the logical order is modified, which might be tempting as an aid to formatting, the capability to apply such text processing functions is lost. glyph processing. Characters may require language-specific shaping such as arabic character shaping,
PTOCA-4-635	composition/decomposition, and position adjustments. The rendering is no longer one code point to one character to one glyph, and requires the assistance of a Unicode layout engine. Implementation Note: In AFP environments, the ICU ParagraphLayout API is used to apply Unicode bidi layout processing and glyph processing to complex text. This API is developed by the International Components for Unicode (ICU) project, which is jointly managed by a group of companies and individuals throughout the world; see http://site.icu-project.org. Complex text processing for UCT text is enabled or disabled by controls in the UCT. If both bidi layout processing and glyph processing are disabled, the code points in the text that follows UCT are not processed as complex text and instead are processed as if they were contained within a TRN control sequence. If either bidi layout processing or glyph processing is to be applied, the sequence of Unicode code points must first be normalized. This involves, for example, replacing composite character sequences with their equivalent composed character. The Unicode normalization format used in PTOCA objects is Normalization Form C (NFC). If the normalization step was not applied by the formatter that generated the complex text, it is applied by the presentation device before bidi layout processing or glyph processing is applied. Architecture Note: The Unicode character encoding is defined in the Unicode Standard, which is available from the Unicode Consortium at http://unicode.org/standard/standard.html.
PTOCA-4-636	Syntax Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE PREFIX X'2B' Control Sequence Prefix M N N
PTOCA-4-637	CODE CLASS X'D3' Control sequence class M N N
PTOCA-4-638	UBIN LENGTH X'10' Control sequence length M N N
PTOCA-4-639	CODE TYPE X'6A' Control sequence function type M N N
PTOCA-4-640	CODE UCTVERS X'01' UCT version level
PTOCA-4-641	X'01' Base level M N N 5 Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-642	6–7 UBIN CTLNGTH 0 – 32,767 Length of complex text data that follows this control sequence M N N 8 BITS CTFLGS See
PTOCA-4-643	Semantics section Complex text processing control flags M N N 9 Reserved; should be zero M N N
PTOCA-4-644	CODE BIDICT X'02', X'04',
PTOCA-4-645	X'05', X'12', X'20', X'22', X'23' Bidi layout processing control: X'02' Enable; default p.d. is L→R X'04' Enable; set p.d. L→R X'05' Enable; set p.d. R→L X'12' Enable; p.d. set from previous UCT; default L→R X'20' Disable X'22' Disable; t.d. L→R X'23' Disable; t.d. R→L M N N 1 1 CODE GLYPHCT X'01', X'20' Glyph processing control:
PTOCA-4-646	X'01' Enable X'20' Disable M N N 12 – 15 Reserved; should be zero M N N 16 – 17 SBIN ALTIPOS X'8000' – X'7FFF' Alternate current inline position M N N Table Note: The terms 'p.d.' and 't.d.' stand for paragraph direction and text direction, respectively. ALTIPOS is a signed binary number in measurement units.The range for ALTIPOS assumes a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. If it is necessary to convert to a different measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”.
PTOCA-4-647	Semantics This control sequence marks the start of a string of code points, all of which are to be processed as graphic characters. No code point within the marked string of text is recognized as a Control Sequence Prefix. This string of code points is also called “UCT text”. If the code points in the text that follows the UCT control sequence cannot be processed as Unicode complex text, or if glyph processing and bidi processing are disabled, the code points are processed as if they were contained in a TRN control sequence. In that case, the current inline position is incremented for each graphic character in the string as follows: For graphic characters following each other:
PTOCA-4-648	$I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + ADJSTMNT + CI and intervening non-incrementing characters are ignored. For graphic characters following RMI, AMI, or BLN control sequences or following a space character or
PTOCA-4-649	variable space character: $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI and intervening non-incrementing characters are ignored. For the variable space character:
PTOCA-4-650	$I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + VSI For a non-incrementing character:
PTOCA-4-651	$I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ In all cases:
PTOCA-4-652	If the code points in the text that follows the UCT control sequence can be processed as Unicode complex text, and if glyph processing or bidi processing is enabled, glyph positions and advances are determined with the aid of a Unicode layout engine. In that case the advancement of the current text position is no longer a direct function of the individual character increments. Additionally, the optional placement of text at the alternate inline position may dictate the new text position. If CTFLGS bit 3 = B'0' - advance $Ic$ , the current text position $I{cnew}$ at the completion of a UCT is then generated as follows: If $Ic$
PTOCA-4-653	was used to position the UCT text: $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + sum{G I } If I a was used to position the UCT text: $I{cnew}$ = I a If CTFLGS bit 3 = B'1' - maintain $Ic$ , the current text position $I{cnew}$ at the completion of a UCT is given by: $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ Where: $Ic$ = the current text position at the start of UCT processing I a = the alternate text position at the start of UCT processing G I = the increment for a grapheme in the UCT sum = summation over all the graphemes that were presented for the UCT
PTOCA-4-654	UCTVERS specifies the functional level of the complex text support in the UCT. Value Definition X'01' Base level of complex text support All others Reserved CTLNGTH specifies the total number of bytes in the sequence of code points that follows UCT; that is, it specifies the length of the text that follows UCT. The bytes identified by this parameter are processed as code points and are presented without a scan for embedded control sequences. CTFLGS is a bit-encoded parameter that specifies controls for processing the Unicode complex text code points that follow, and is defined as follows: BIT MEANING 0 Normalization
PTOCA-4-655	Alternate inline position (I
PTOCA-4-656	a ) valid 2 Alternate inline position (I
PTOCA-4-657	a ) coordinates 3 Maintain current inline position ($Ic$
PTOCA-4-658	) 4 Reset paragraph direction
PTOCA-4-659	Reserved, that is, set to B'0' by generators and ignored by receivers
PTOCA-4-660	Bit 1, Alternate inline position (I a ) valid A value of B'0' in this bit indicates that the alternate inline position parameter ALTIPOS is not valid and cannot be used to position UCT text. A value of B'1' in this bit indicates that the alternate inline position parameter ALTIPOS is valid and can be used to position UCT text. Bit 2, Alternate inline position (I a ) coordinates A value of B'0' in this bit indicates that the alternate inline position parameter I a is specified using absolute i- coordinate values. In this case the range of I a is restricted to positive values. A value of B'1' in this indicates that the alternate inline position parameter I a is specified using relative i-coordinate values that are measured with respect to the current inline position $Ic$ . In this case the range of I
PTOCA-4-661	Table 14. UCT Text Positioning PTOCA (i,b) Orientation Character Rotation UCT Para- graph Direction UCT Character Position w.r. to I a or $Ic$ UCT Character Position w.r. to $Ic$ only All 8 (i,b) orientations Character rotation 0°: Horizontal L→R writing mode L→R Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction R→L Start at I a ; place UCT text so it extends in (-) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction All 8 (i,b) orientations Character rotation 180°: Horizontal R→L writing mode R→L Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction L→R Start at I a ; place UCT text so it extends in (-) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction All 8 (i,b) orientations Character rotation 270°: V ertical T→B writing mode N/A Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction All 8 (i,b) orientations Character rotation 90°: V ertical B→T writing mode N/A Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction Start at $Ic$ ; place UCT text so it extends in (+) i- direction Table Notes: 1. The terms 'left', 'right', 'top', and 'bottom–as in 'L→R', 'R→L', 'T→B', and 'B→T'–only have meaning when
PTOCA-4-662	the media has been oriented so that the characters appear right-side-up. 2. The (+) i-direction is the direction of increasing i-values; the (-) i-direction is the direction of decreasing
PTOCA-4-663	i-values. ### Pragmatics The CTLNGTH parameter must specify an even number when the character encoding is double-byte, as in UTF-16. If CTLNGTH is an odd number when the character encoding is double byte, exception condition EC-1A01 exists. The standard action is to process the code point sequence up to the last byte, skip the odd byte, exit UCT processing mode, and continue processing. If the CTLNGTH value is out of the architected range, exception condition EC-9B01 exists. The standard action is to process the UCT code points up to the maximum valid value of CTLNGTH, exit UCT processing mode, and continue processing. If the UCTVERS, BIDICT, or GLYPHCT parameters specify an invalid value, exception condition EC-9B01 exists. The standard action is to process the UCT code points as if they were within a TRN. The code points that follow the UCT may not specify valid Unicode data. In that case exception condition EC-1A03 exists, and the standard action is to skip the remainder of the UCT code points, exit UCT processing mode, and continue processing. The UCT control sequence always terminates chaining. Therefore, in the exception cases noted, when the presentation device exits UCT processing mode, it continues processing by interpreting the next bytes as either code points or the start of an unchained control sequence.
PTOCA-4-664	Exception Conditions This control sequence can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1A01...The CTLNGTH parameter is an odd number, but the character encoding is double byte.
PTOCA-4-665	EC-9B01...The CTLNGTH, UCTVERS, BIDICT, or GLYPHCT parameter values are invalid.
PTOCA-4-666	EC-1A03...Invalid Unicode data. This can be caused by one of the following:
PTOCA-4-667	– A high-order surrogate code value was not immediately followed by a low-order surrogate code value. The high-order surrogate range is U+D800 through U+DBFF. – A low-order surrogate code value was not immediately preceded by a high-order surrogate code value. The low-order surrogate range is U+DC00 through U+DFFF. – An illegal UTF-8 byte sequence, as defined in the Unicode 3.2 Specification, was specified. For more information on illegal UTF-8 byte sequences, see Table 15. Application Note. For a formal definition of UTF-8, consult the Unicode 3.2 Specification. The illegal UTF-8 byte sequences can be summarized as follows: The value in the 1st byte of the UTF-8 byte sequence was not in the legal UTF-8 range (X'00' - X'7F' and
PTOCA-4-668	X'C2' - X'F4'). The value in the 2nd byte of the UTF-8 byte sequence was not in the legal UTF-8 range allowed by the value
PTOCA-4-669	in the 1st byte. The valid ranges for the 2nd byte are shown in Table 15. Table 15. V alid Values for UTF-8 First and Second Bytes First Byte Second Byte X'C2'–X'DF' X'80''–X'BF' X'E0' X'A0''–X'BF' X'E1''–X'EC' X'80''–X'BF' X'ED' X'80''–X'9F' X'EE''–X'EF' X'80''–X'BF' X'F0' X'90''–X'BF' X'F1''–X'F3' X'80''–X'BF' X'F4' X'80''–X'8F' The value in the 3rd or 4th byte of the UTF-8 byte sequence was not in the legal UTF-8 range for that byte
PTOCA-4-670	(X'80' - X'BF'). Bidi Layout Processing for UCT Text A number of parameters–both outside the UCT and inside the UCT–determine how Unicode bidi layout processing is applied to text in a UCT: Text orientation. The orientation of the (i,b) coordinate system which specifies the baseline on which glyphs
PTOCA-4-671	are positioned and the reference inline direction for progressing text directional runs. Character rotation. Alignment of a character with respect to the baseline. Differentiates between horizontal
PTOCA-4-672	and vertical writing modes. Writing mode. Can be horizontal (L→R or R→L) or vertical (top->bottom or bottom->top). Determines–
PTOCA-4-673	together with the paragraph direction–how UCT text is positioned with respect to the current inline position ($Ic$ ) or with respect to an alternate inline position (I a ). Bidirectional character property. A property value assigned by the Unicode standard to each character,
PTOCA-4-674	including unassigned characters. Values include strong L→R, strong R→L, weak L→R, weak R→L, and neutral characters. Text direction. Specifies the visual ordering of characters in a given directional run. The inherent directional
PTOCA-4-675	Paragraph direction. Specifies the dominant text direction for a UCT. Used as an input to the Unicode bidi
PTOCA-4-676	UCT Bidi Processing Examples The following examples illustrate how the writing mode, text direction, and paragraph direction influence the rendering of UCT Unicode bidi text. For all the examples, assume a character string that is stored in logical (storage) order as: R0 R1 R2 L3 L4 L5 R6 R7 R8 N9 where the R i are strong R→L characters, such as Arabic and Hebrew characters, the L i are strong L→R characters, such as English (Latin) characters, and the N i have a neutral directional property, such as a punctuation mark. The text direction affects character ordering when processing a given directional run from logical (storage) order into visual (rendering) order. The text direction of the L
PTOCA-4-677	i characters is L→R. In that case the characters are rendered as: L3 L4 L5 The text direction of the R
PTOCA-4-678	i characters is R→L. In that case the characters are rendered as: R8 R7 R6 and R2 R1 R0 The text direction can also be set by the BIDICT parameter on the UCT. With BIDICT values X'22'and X'23',
PTOCA-4-679	the text direction is fixed as either L→R or R→L, respectively, regardless of the directional property of the characters. Care must be taken when using these BIDICT values or undesirable results may occur, as for example, in the following cases: – If BIDICT=X'22' (set L→R text direction), the R i strings are rendered as: R0 R1 R2 and R6 R7 R8 – Similarly, if BIDICT=X'23' (set R→L text direction), the L i string is rendered as: L5 L4 L3 The paragraph direction affects the ordering of directional runs in a UCT and of directionally-neutral characters in a UCT. Assume that the complete string in the previous example is included in a single UCT. If the paragraph direction is R→L, the complete string is rendered as:
PTOCA-4-680	N9 R8 R7 R6 L3 L4 L5 R2 R1 R0 If the paragraph direction is L→R, the complete string is rendered as:
PTOCA-4-681	R2 R1 R0 L3 L4 L5 R8 R7 R6 N9 The writing mode determines how UCT text is positioned on the current baseline. Assume the current inline position is $Ic$ . Writing mode L→R, paragraph direction L→R:
PTOCA-4-682	($Ic$ ) R2 R1 R0 L3 L4 L5 R8 R7 R6 N9 Writing mode R→L, paragraph direction L→R:
PTOCA-4-683	R2 R1 R0 L3 L4 L5 R8 R7 R6 N9 ($Ic$ ) Writing mode L→R, paragraph direction R→L:
PTOCA-4-684	($Ic$ ) N9 R8 R7 R6 L3 L4 L5 R2 R1 R0 Writing mode R→L, paragraph direction R→L:
PTOCA-4-685	N9 R8 R7 R6 L3 L4 L5 R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) The alternate inline position (I a ), if specified, can aff ect how the UCT text is positioned on the baseline as follows. Writing mode L→R, paragraph direction L→R:
PTOCA-4-686	($Ic$ ) R2 R1 R0 L3 L4 L5 R8 R7 R6 N9 (I a ) Writing mode L→R, paragraph direction R→L:
PTOCA-4-687	($Ic$ ) N9 R8 R7 R6 L3 L4 L5 R2 R1 R0 (I a ) Writing mode R→L, paragraph direction R→L:
PTOCA-4-688	N9 R8 R7 R6 L3 L4 L5 R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) (I a ) Writing mode R→L, paragraph direction L→R:
PTOCA-4-689	<< font change >> UCT2b{TD=L→R} L5 << font change >> << Relative Move Inline in (+) i-direction by M2a >> UCT3{TD=R→L} R6 R7 R8 N9 This results in the correct rendering of the string: (I c1 ) R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) (I c2a ) L3 L4 (I c1 ) R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) (I c2a ) L3 L4 (I c2b ) L5 (I c1 ) R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) (I c3 ) N9 R8 R7 R6 (I c2a ) L3 L4 (I c2b ) L5 (I c1 ) R2 R1 R0 ($Ic$ ) Implementation Note: The use of the ICU ParagraphLayout API is recommended for PTOCA generators that need to segment bidi paragraphs. This APIcan provide the information needed to specify a text direction and position for each segmented UCT. See http://site.icu-project.or. Effect of Other PTOCA Control Sequences on UCT Text The unique characteristics of complex text require that some PTOCA control sequences have a different effect on UCT text processing than they do on non-UCT text processing. These differenc es are defined as follows: Overstrike (OVS). Table 16 defines which Unicode space characters are treated as PTOCA
PTOCA-4-690	space characters or variable space characters when an overstrike is generated. This applies to both UCT text and Unicode-encoded non-UCT text. Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA). If glyph processing or bidi layout processing is enabled, intercharacter
PTOCA-4-691	adjustment is not applied to UCT text, and the current inline position is incremented for each graphic character as follows: $I{cnew}$ = $Ic$ + CI In all other cases the SIA control sequence is processed the same for UCT text as for non-UCT text. Set Text Orientation (STO). If bidi layout processing is enabled and the writing mode is horizontal, characters
PTOCA-4-692	in complex text may be progressed in the negative i-direction as defined in Table 14. In all other cases the STO control sequence is processed the same for UCT text as for non-UCT text. Set V ariable Space Character Increment (SVI). Table 16 defines which Unicode space
PTOCA-4-693	characters are mapped to the PTOCA variable space character and are assigned the increment specified by the SVIcontrol sequence. This applies to both UCT text and Unicode-encoded non-UCT text. Temporary Baseline Move (TBM). If glyph processing or bidi layout processing is enabled, the precision
PTOCA-4-694	parameter in this control sequence is ignored for complex text, and such text is processed as if the precision parameter were set to B'0' - actual placement method. This means that the presentation device must actually move the baseline and position the complex text characters on the temporary baseline. In all other cases the TBM control sequence is processed the same for UCT text as for non-UCT text. Underscore (USC). Table 16 defines which Unicode space characters are treated as PTOCA
PTOCA-4-695	Presentation Text Data Descriptor The Presentation Text Data Descriptor provides initial parameters for the Presentation Text Object. Syntax: Please see the appendixes for information about the syntax of the Presentation Text Data Descriptor and its parameters within the MO:DCA and IPDS environments. Semantics: A Presentation Text Data Descriptor describes a Presentation Text object. It specifies the measurement units for the object and the size of the object. The descriptor also may describe the object through a list of initial text conditions, which contain initial values such as the size of the inline margin. Pragmatics: The Presentation Text Data Descriptor is optional, because its parameters may be specified by the controlling environment or by default. The descriptor parameters fall into the following categories: 1. Measurement units parameters:
PTOCA-4-696	Unit base
PTOCA-4-697	$Xp$ -units per unit base $Yp$ -units per unit base 2. Size parameters
PTOCA-4-698	$Xp$ -extent of the presentation space $Yp$ -extent of the presentation space 3. Initial text condition parameters
PTOCA-4-699	The following section describes these parameters. Measurement Unit Parameters Semantics: These parameters specify the measurement units for the Presentation Text object space:: Unit base A number from 0 through 1 $Xp$ -units per unit base A number from 1 through 32,767 $Yp$ -units per unit base A number from 1 through 32,767 The unit base parameterspecifies the measurement base. It has the following values: Values Description 0 Ten inches
PTOCA-4-700	Ten centimeters
PTOCA-4-701	Reserved
PTOCA-4-702	If the value of the unit base parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-0505 exists. The standard action is to ignore this parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted. For detailed information about subsets, please see Chapter 6, “Compliance with PTOCA”,, Appendix A, “MO: DCA Environment”,, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data stream documentation. Units of measure are defined as the measurement base divided by the units per unit base. That is, if the measurement base is 10 inches and the units per unit base are 5,000, the units of measure are 10 inches / 5000 or one five-hundredth of an inch. Here are further examples.
PTOCA-4-703	Table 17. Examples of Measurement Units Units/inch Parameter Values Comments 800 X 800 units/in. Unit base = 0
PTOCA-4-704	$Xp$ -units per unit base = 8,000 $Yp$ -units per unit base = 8,000 8,000 divisions in 10 in. on both axes 80 X 77 units/cm. Unit base = 1
PTOCA-4-705	$Xp$ -units per unit base = 800 $Yp$ -units per unit base = 770 800 divisions in 10 cm. on $Xp$
PTOCA-4-706	divisions in 10 cm. on $Yp$
PTOCA-4-707	X 195.5
PTOCA-4-708	units/in. Unit base = 0 $Xp$ -units per unit base = 2,033 $Yp$ -units per unit base = 1,955 2,033 divisions in 10 in. on $Xp$ 1,955 divisions in 10 in. on $Yp$ 240 x 240 units/in. Unit base = 0
PTOCA-4-709	$Xp$ -units per unit base = 2,400 $Yp$ -units per unit base = 2,400 2,400 divisions in 10 in. on both axes 1,440 x 1,440 units/in. Unit base = 0 $Xp$ -units per unit base = 14,400 $Yp$ -units per unit base = 14,400 14,400 divisions in 10 in. on both axes In row 1 of the table, the measurement base is 10 inches. The units per unit base value specifies 8,000 divisions in 10 inches, which is 800 divisions per inch. In row 2 of the table, the measurement base is 10 centimeters. The units per unit base value for the $Xp$ -axis specifies 800 divisions in each 10 centimeters, which is 80 divisions per centimeter. The units per unit base value for the $Yp$ -axis specifies 770 divisions per measurement base, which is 77 divisions per centimeter. In this case, the units per unit base values dif fer along the $Xp$ -axis and $Yp$ -axis. If the value of the $Xp$ -units per unit base parameter or the $Yp$ -units per unit base parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-0605 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted. Measurement units specified for the $Xp$ -axis may be diffe rent from the measurement units specified for the $Yp$ - axis. Pragmatics: The measurement units for the I-axis are the same as the measurement units for the $Xp$ ,$Yp$ axis that is parallel to it. The units of the B-axis are the same as those of the other $Xp$ ,$Yp$ axis. The origin and orientation of the I-axis and B-axis can be specified by the Text Orientation initial text conditions, and by the Set Text Orientation control sequence. The values of the presentation text measurement units cannot be changed within a Presentation Text object, but the values of presentation text orientation can be changed. Size Parameters Semantics: Size consists of two parameters that specify the dimensions of a Presentation Text object, that is, the length of the $Xp$ -axis and the $Yp$ -axis. These dimensions, or extents, are described as follows. $Xp$ -extent A number specifying the size of the Presentation Text object along the $Xp$ -axis. $Yp$ -extent A number specifying the size of the Presentation Text object along the $Yp$ -axis. Each extent is measured in $Xp$ -units or $Yp$ -units. For information about the syntax of the extent fields, please see Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. If the value of the $Xp$ -extent parameter or the $Yp$ -extent parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-0705 exists. The standard action is to ignore the invalid
PTOCA-4-710	parameter and continue presentation with the parameter value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset may limit the range permitted. These extents are used in conjunction with the measurement units to specify the size of the Presentation Text object and for positions and displacements within the object. Architecture Note: Note that when presentation text is processed in a MO:DCA environment where the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) is carried in the Active Environment Group (AEG) for the page, or when such text is processed in an IPDS environment, the Presentation Text object is bounded by the beginning of the page and the end of the page. This is sometimes called a text major environment. When the PTD is carried in the Object Environment Group (OEG) of a MO:DCA text object, the text object is bounded by the Begin Presentation Text (BPT) and End Presentation Text (EPT) structured fields. For such objects, the PTD in the AEG is ignored. The range of supported values is receiver dependent. Pragmatics: If the object's origin, orientation, and size are such that the object projects beyond the associated object area, the applicable data-stream standard action or default action must be invoked. This allows the controlling environment to control clipping. If a control sequence, parameter, or other data element within the object causes presentation outside of the object space, exception condition EC-0103 exists when an attempt is made to present. The standard action is to ignore the character or control sequence that is presenting outside of the object space. If any part of the character box for a character exceeds the boundaries of the object space, an exception condition exists even though the character's presentation position is within the object space. Please see “Graphic Character Processing”. Exception Conditions: The measurement units parameters and the size parameters can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0505...The value of the unit base parameter is not supported, or is not in the range specified by PTOC A.
PTOCA-4-711	EC-0605...The value of the $Xp$
PTOCA-4-712	-units per unit base parameter or the $Yp$ -units per unit base parameter is not supported, or is not in the range specified by PTOCA. EC-0705...The value of the $Xp$
PTOCA-4-713	-extent parameter or the $Yp$ -extent parameter is not supported, or is not in the range specified by PTOCA. EC-0103...The contents of the Presentation Text object will cause presentation outside of the object space.
PTOCA-4-714	Presentation Text Flags Semantics: This parameter is reserved. Generators should set it to zero and receivers should ignore it.
PTOCA-4-715	Initial Text Condition Parameters The Initial Text Condition parameters specify initial values for the Presentation Text object. They include the following parameters: Baseline increment
PTOCA-4-716	Coded font local ID
PTOCA-4-717	Extended text color
PTOCA-4-718	Initial baseline coordinate
PTOCA-4-719	Initial inline coordinate
PTOCA-4-720	Inline margin
PTOCA-4-721	Intercharacter adjustment
PTOCA-4-722	Text color
PTOCA-4-723	Text orientation
PTOCA-4-724	The following pages contain the semantics and the pragmatics of the PTOCA initial text condition parameters. For the syntax, please see Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. Baseline Increment Baseline Increment specifies the distance between successive baselines. Semantics: This parameterspecifies the initial value of the increment in the B-direction from the current baseline position to a new baseline position. If the value of this parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified, exception condition EC-1 101 exists. The standard action is to ignore this parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges. The default value is the Default Baseline Increment associated with the default coded font of the device. Pragmatics: The baseline position is incremented by this value after each Begin Line control sequence is encountered in a text stream. If the value of this parameter is zero, each line appears superimposed over the preceding line. This value can be overridden for the duration of a Presentation Text object by a Set Baseline Increment control sequence.
PTOCA-4-725	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception condition: EC-1 101...The value of the baseline increment parameter is not supported or is not in the range specified by
PTOCA-4-726	PTOCA. Coded Font Local ID C oded Font Local ID specifies a font. Semantics: This parameterspecifies the initial value of the coded font local identifier (LID). The LID is used by the controlling environment to access a coded font when presenting subsequent text in the current Presentation Text object. If the value of the LID is not supported or is not within the range specified, exception condition EC-0C01 exists. The standard action is to ignore this parameter and to use the active coded font and character attributes determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may also limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges. The default value is the LID of the default coded font of the device.
PTOCA-4-727	Pragmatics: The LID is equated to a coded font, character rotation, and font modification parameters by a mapping function in the controlling environment. If the text orientation is changed and the coded font selected by this parameter is not compatible with the new orientation, when an attempt is made to present a character from the selected coded font, exception condition EC-3F02 exists. The standard action is to complete the presentation at this presentation position using the receiver's default font. This results in the best possible presentation within the limits of the receiver's capability. If there is an intercharacter adjustment value, it is not applied. The measurement units used in the object and those used by the coded font selected for presentation are assumed to be compatible. If the measurement units are not compatible, the standard action is to present a best fit of the character and continue processing. A best fit could result in no mark or unintelligible marks on the presentation surface. Incompatibility of measurement units is not an exception condition in PTOCA. Exception condition EC-1802 occurs in the following cases: The Coded Font Local ID parameter is present in the Presentation Text Data Descriptor but a corresponding
PTOCA-4-728	mapping function does not exist in the controlling environment. An equate of the local identifier to a global identifier does not exist, or substitution parameters do not exist, in
PTOCA-4-729	the controlling environment. The coded font identified by the map is not available in the receiver. The standard action is to substitute the receiver's default font for the requested font and continue processing.
PTOCA-4-730	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0C01...The value of the LID parameter is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-731	EC-3F02...The font is not compatible with the text orientation.
PTOCA-4-732	EC-1802...The font requested cannot be provided.
PTOCA-4-733	Extended Text Color The Extended Text Color parameterspecifies a process or highlight color value and defines the color space and encoding for that value. The specified color value is applied to foreground areas of the text presentation space. Foreground areas consist of the following: The stroked and filled areas of solid text characters, including overstrike characters. With hollow characters,
PTOCA-4-734	only the stroked portion of the character is considered foreground. The stroked area of a rule.
PTOCA-4-735	The stroked area of an underscore.
PTOCA-4-736	All other areas of the text presentation space are considered background. Semantics: Refer to “Set Extended Text Color (SEC)” for a description of the parameter semantics. The controlling environment may limit the range permitted. See “Related Publications” for the appropriate data-stream documentation. Note that the Extended Text Color parameter is not supported as an initial text condition in IPDS Environments, see “Presentation Text Data Descriptor for Text-Major Text” on. Pragmatics: If the receiver does not support the specified color value exception condition EC-0E03 exists. The standard action in this case is to use the presentation device default color.
PTOCA-4-737	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception conditions: EC-0E02...Invalid or unsupported color space.
PTOCA-4-738	EC-0E03...Invalid or unsupported color value.
PTOCA-4-739	EC-0E04...Invalid percent value.
PTOCA-4-740	EC-0E05...Invalid or unsupported number of bits in a color component.
PTOCA-4-741	Initial Baseline Coordinate The Initial Baseline Coordinate specifies the point on the B-axis within the object space to which the current addressable position will be initialized. This value is called the B-displacement. Semantics: This parameterspecifies a displacement in the B-direction from the I-axis for the initial addressable position. If the value of the B-displacement is not supported or is not within the range specified, exception condition EC-6B02 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the invalid parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may also limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges. The default value is device-dependent. Pragmatics: If the value of the B-displacement is X'0000', the initial addressable position in the B-direction is at the I-axis. This does not affect the inline margin.
PTOCA-4-742	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception condition: EC-6B02...The value of the B-displacement parameter is not supported or is not in the range specified by
PTOCA-4-743	PTOCA. Initial Inline Coordinate The Initial Inline Coordinate specifies the point on the I-axis within the object space to which the current addressable position will be initialized. This value is called the I-displacement. Semantics: This parameterspecifies a displacement in the I-direction from the B-axis for the initial addressable position. If the value of the I-displacement is not supported or is not within the range specified, exception condition EC-6A02 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the invalid parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may also limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges. The default value is zero. Pragmatics: If the value of the I-displacement is X'0000', the initial addressable position in the I-direction is at the B-axis. This does not affect the inline margin.
PTOCA-4-744	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception condition: EC-6A02...The value of the I-displacement parameter is not supported or is not in the range specified by
PTOCA-4-745	PTOCA. Inline Margin Inline Margin specifies the position of the inline margin. Semantics: This parameterspecifies the initial value for the location of the inline margin. This value is a displacement in the I-direction from the B-axis to the inline margin in the current Presentation Text object. If this parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified, the exception condition EC-1001 exists. The standard action is to ignore this parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163 and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges.
PTOCA-4-746	The default value is zero. Pragmatics: The addressable position for the first line of presentation text is specified by the Initial Baseline Coordinate and Initial Inline Coordinate initial text conditions. After each Begin Line control sequence is processed, the addressable position is placed at the inline margin. If the value of the inline margin parameter is X'0000', the inline margin is at the B-axis.
PTOCA-4-747	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception condition: EC-1001...The displacement parameter is not supported or is not in the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-748	Intercharacter Adjustment Intercharacter Adjustment specifies additional increment or decrement between graphic characters. Semantics: The adjustment parameterspecifies the initial value of additional space between graphic characters. This space is in the I-direction from the end of the current character increment to the presentation position of the following graphic character. When this value is positive, the adjustment is called an increment. When the value is negative, the adjustment is called a decrement. The direction parameterspecifies the direction in which the intercharacter adjustment is to be applied. Intercharacter increment, which occurs when the direction parameter is X'00', is applied in the positive I-direction. Intercharacter decrement, which occurs when the direction parameter is X'01', is applied in the negative I-direction. The default value for the direction parameter is X'00'. Intercharacter adjustment is not applied before or after the following: A space character or variable space character
PTOCA-4-749	A Begin Line control sequence
PTOCA-4-750	A Relative Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-751	An Absolute Move Inline control sequence
PTOCA-4-752	For non-incrementing characters, the adjustment is applied from the current addressable position to locate the presentation position of the non-incrementing character, but the current addressable position is unchanged. The effect is that the non-incrementing character may be coupled with a graphic character, resulting in an overstrike function, and the adjustment is applied to the coupled characters. If the value of the adjustment parameter or the direction parameter is not supported or is not within the range specified, exception condition EC-1201 exists. The standard action in this case is to ignore the Intercharacter Adjustment parameter and continue presentation with the parameter values determined according to the hierarchy. The subset level may also limit the range permitted. See Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, on page 163 and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”, for more information about valid ranges. The default value is zero for both the adjustment parameter and the direction parameter. Pragmatics: If the value of the adjustment parameter is X'0000', no additional intercharacter increment or decrement appears between graphic characters.
PTOCA-4-753	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception conditions: EC-1201...The value of the adjustment parameter or the direction parameter is not supported, or is not in the
PTOCA-4-754	range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-755	Text Color The Text Color parameterspecifies a named color that selects the foreground color of subsequent text characters, rules, and underscores. Architecture Note: Pre-year 2000 applications and printers support an optional PRECISION parameter for text color. This parameter has been retired. It should not be generated by new applications, and should be ignored by new printers. For a definition of this parameter, see “Retired Parameters”. Semantics: The named color value is applied to foreground areas of the text presentation space. Foreground areas consist of the following: The stroked and filled areas of solid text characters, including overstrike characters. With hollow characters,
PTOCA-4-756	only the stroked portion of the character is considered foreground. The stroked area of a rule.
PTOCA-4-757	The stroked area of an underscore.
PTOCA-4-758	All other areas of the text presentation space are considered background. Please refer to Table 13 on page 103 for the foreground color values and their associated colors. The default color attribute value is X'FF07'.
PTOCA-4-759	If the value of the foreground color attribute is not supported or is not within the range specified by PTOCA, exception condition EC-5803 exists. The standard action is to ignore these parameters and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy. The controlling environment may limit the range permitted. See “Related Publications” for the appropriate data-stream documentation. Pragmatics: The default color attribute value (FRGCOLOR = X'FFFF') is determined hierarchically. The following order applies: 1. Value set by Text Color initial text condition parameter in Descriptor
PTOCA-4-760	PTOCA default – X'FF07'.
PTOCA-4-761	The device default value is the receiver ’ s default. For example, characters, rules, and underscores will be presented in black on a receiver which supports only black. The receiver ’ s best possible value means that if the receiver has limited color capabilities, then it may substitute a color it supports for one it does not support. For example, the receiver may substitute red for pink, blue for turquoise, and so forth. The color attribute values X'FF00' to X'FF06' are translated to X'0000' to X'0006' and treated exactly like those colors. The PTOCA default value of X'FF07' is the device default. For example, characters, rules, and underscores will be presented in black on a device which supports only black. A color attribute value of X'FF08' means that the receiver's default background color should be used for the foreground color. This provides an erase function. ### Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception condition: EC-5803...The foreground color parameter (FRGCOLOR) value is invalid, or the specified color is not
PTOCA-4-762	supported. Text Orientation Text Orientation consists of two parameters that establish the I-direction and the B-direction for presentation text. Semantics: These parameters specify the initial I-axis and B-axis orientations with respect to the $Xp$ -axis. These orientations are expressed in degrees and minutes. The same format is used for both orientations. Each is a two-byte, three-part code of the form ABC.
PTOCA-4-763	A is a nine-bit binary number (bits 0 - 8) which provides from 0 through 359 degrees. Values from 360
PTOCA-4-764	through 51 1 are invalid. B is a six-bit binary number (bits 9 - 14) which provides from 0 through 59 minutes. Values from 60 through
PTOCA-4-765	are invalid.
PTOCA-4-766	C is a one-bit reserved field (bit 15) which must be B'0'.
PTOCA-4-767	A value of X'0000' for the I-axis orientation parameter indicates that the positive direction is parallel to the $Xp$ - axis. Increasing values for these parameters indicate increasing clockwise rotation. The default value for the I-axis is X'0000', that is, zero degrees. The default value for the B-axis is X'2D00', that is, 90 degrees. The maximum value for IORNTION and BORNTION is X'B3F6' or B'101 1001 1 1 1 1 101 10', which is 359 degrees and 59 minutes. Pragmatics: I-direction is the direction in which additional characters appear in a line of text. B-direction is the direction in which additional lines of text appear. If the I-axis is not parallel to either the $Xp$ -axis or $Yp$ -axis, exception condition EC-6802 exists. If the B-axis is not parallel to either the $Xp$ -axis or $Yp$ -axis, exception condition EC-6902 exists. The standard action in this case is to set the I-axis equal to the $Xp$ -axis direction and the B-axis equal to the $Yp$ -axis direction. The origin of the I-axis and the B-axis is always one of the four corners of the object space. Orientations other than 0,90 are valid, but may be constrained by receiver limitations or parameters in controlling environment. If the I-axis orientation is not supported by the receiver, exception condition EC-6802 exists. If the B-axis orientation is not supported by the receiver, exception condition EC-6902 exists. The standard action is to use 0,90 degrees. These exception condition codes and standard actions also apply to orientation values not within the range specified by PTOCA.
PTOCA-4-768	Exception Conditions This parameter can cause the following exception conditions: EC-6802...The I-axis is not parallel to the $Xp$
PTOCA-4-769	-axis or the $Yp$ -axis. EC-6902...The B-axis is not parallel to the $Xp$
PTOCA-5-001	Chapter 5. Exception Handling in PTOCA This chapter: Describes exception condition detection
PTOCA-5-002	Describes exception responses and standard actions
PTOCA-5-003	Lists the PTOCA exception condition codes
PTOCA-5-004	Faithful Reproduction PTOCA is intended to be precise enough to permit multiple products to reproduce the Presentation Text object faithfully. Faithful reproduction includes such aspects as the size and relative positions of graphic characters and strings of graphic characters. Examples are the placement of columns in tables, mathematical constructs such as subscripts or limits of integrals, and the appearance of graphic characters. PTOCA can only make faithful reproduction possible. The responsibility for faithful reproduction belongs to the process that presents the object. PTOCA is also designed to permit less than faithful reproduction of the Presentation Text object. It is possible to specify those exception conditions for which continuation of processing is acceptable. This permits a process that cannot faithfully reproduce the object to continue with its best approximation. If less than faithful reproduction is acceptable for an application, interchange among a larger set of receivers is possible. If a requirement for faithful reproduction is specified, and if a process cannot present a faithful reproduction, reproduction is not continued. To satisfy these objectives, PTOCA anticipates the existence of exception conditions, specifies how each is to be handled so that results are predictable, and lets the controlling environment control exception condition actions. ### Exception Conditions An exception condition in the object is the appearance of the following: Invalid or unsupported parameter value
PTOCA-5-005	Invalid or unsupported parameter
PTOCA-5-006	Invalid or unsupported control sequence
PTOCA-5-007	PTOCA specifies valid values for parameters, appropriate and inappropriate parameters, and valid and invalid combinations of control sequences. In addition, an implementation may accept only a subset of valid values or only a subset of appropriate parameters and control sequences. However, PTOC A specifies, by subsetting, which of its controls and parameters are to be supported by the implementations of a subset. Exception conditions can be classified as: Syntactic
PTOCA-5-008	Semantic
PTOCA-5-009	Pragmatic
PTOCA-5-010	A syntactic exception condition is a violation of a structural architectural specification. Syntactic exception conditions defined for PTOCA include: Invalid control sequence
PTOCA-5-011	Invalid parameter value
PTOCA-5-012	Control sequence appearing in invalid context
PTOCA-5-013	A semantic exception condition is a violation of a functional architectural specification, that is, what a parameter, structured field, or control sequence does, independent of how it looks or how it is used. Semantic exception conditions defined for PTOCA include: Selection of inconsistent or contradictory functions
PTOCA-5-014	Loss of presentation information
PTOCA-5-015	A pragmatic exception condition is an incorrect usage of an architectural specification that is valid structurally and semantically. It is normally caused by an incompatibility between a Presentation Text object and a product that processes or presents it. Pragmatic exception conditions are not defined by PTOCA and cannot be detected by inspection of a Presentation Text object. Pragmatic exception conditions include: Mismatch of characteristics of Presentation Text object and presentation product
PTOCA-5-016	Unavailable resource, for example, coded font
PTOCA-5-017	Unavailable function, for example, overstrike
PTOCA-5-018	Unsupported control sequence
PTOCA-5-019	A product may be unable to distinguish between a syntactic exception and a pragmatic exception, for example, between an invalid parameter value and a parameter value out of the product's range.
PTOCA-5-020	Exception Condition Detection A potential exception condition may exist, yet not be detected during processing of a Presentation Text object. A receiver is not required to process a Presentation Text object beyond its need to perform a specified function. Therefore, a process usually detects only those exception conditions that pertain to the function it is performing. PTOCA defines specific exception conditions that occur within the object, and enables the controlling environment to provide a continuation capability by specifying standard action values to use when no other source is available for the parameter values. In addition, PTOCA does not require that an implementation of the controlling environment do anything more than receive exception conditions and terminate processing the Presentation Text object as a result of them. However, the controlling environment may place more stringent requirements. Syntactic exception conditions can be detected without regard to the value of any other parameter or structured field. A syntactic or semantic exception condition can be detected by inspection of a Presentation Text object. A pragmatic exception condition cannot be detected by inspection of a Presentation Text object alone, but requires knowledge of characteristics of the receiver. If a product that produces or processes a Presentation Text object knows the characteristics of one or more receivers, it can avoid or detect pragmatic exception conditions. If it does not, this detection must be performed by the receiver.
PTOCA-5-021	Exception Condition Handling All processors of a Presentation Text object need not have the same capability for detecting, processing, or reporting exception conditions. Processors of similar capabilities may handle the same exception condition in diffe rent ways. A processor may provide alternative ways to handle an exception condition; however, the processor's capabilities are limited by PTOCA. The controlling environment of a Presentation Text object can specify the response a receiver should make when exception conditions are encountered. This is specified in structures contained in the controlling environment. These structures identify one or more exception conditions, and specify the exception response or effect the exception condition will have on the document presentation process. For example, a document may be terminated when an exception condition is encountered, or processing may continue using the architected standard action for the exception condition. A standard action is specified in PTOCA for many exception conditions. For example, if an implementation cannot process some of the Presentation Text object, the standard action could be to present it with
PTOCA-5-022	unrecognized control sequences omitted or with specified valid parameters substituted for invalid parameters. The standard actions are defined independent of where the exception condition is detected. That is, the receiver may be an application, program product, mechanical device, and so forth. The process always initiates the specified action, and is responsible for its satisfactory completion.
PTOCA-5-023	Exception Responses When an exception condition is detected by a receiver, an exception response is assumed. Exception responses are not specified by PTOCA. The exception condition codes specified are for reference purposes. If the controlling environment specifies a different exception condition code for the same exception condition, the controlling environment's exception condition code overrides the code specified by PTOCA. For example, if a DBR control sequence will cause a rule to extend outside the boundaries of the object space, PTOCA specifies that exception condition code EC-0103 be recognized. However, in the IPDS environment, exception ID 08C1..00 would be recognized. Please see Appendix A, “MO:DCA Environment”, and Appendix B, “IPDS Environment”,. See “Related Publications” for data-stream documentation. Some exception responses can be common to all exception conditions. Others are specific to particular exception conditions. Exception responses that can be common to all exception conditions include the following: T erminate processing Presentation Text object
PTOCA-5-024	Ignore the control that caused the exception condition and continue processing the object
PTOCA-5-025	Partially process the control that caused the exception condition
PTOCA-5-026	Report exception condition back to generator or forward it to the presenter of the object
PTOCA-5-027	Cause an intervention-required condition to occur at the receiver
PTOCA-5-028	Mark the presentation information with diagnostic information
PTOCA-5-029	An example of an exception response that can vary depending on the exception condition is to present the data that caused the exception condition. The data presented may be a receiver-dependent approximation if faithful reproduction is not required. The data presented may be a special, recognizable marker instead of, or in addition to, other data at the position of an exception condition. For example, a blotch may appear where a rule is drawn beyond an object space extent. Another exception response is to present no data at the position of an exception condition. A response for each exception condition may be selected in a manner independent of any other exception condition. Multiple responses may be selected for one exception condition. Certain exception condition actions are mutually exclusive by their nature. PTOCA assumes that the controlling environment provides structures external to the Presentation Text object for handling the responses to exception classes or specific exception conditions received from the object processor.
PTOCA-5-030	Exception Condition Codes The following list contains the exception conditions that implementations of PTOCA are obligated to test for. The codes are consistent with those of the data streams, and conform to the registry of exception condition codes found in IPDS. Please see the appendixes for information about exception conditions in the controlling environment. Table 18. PTOCA Exception Conditions PTOCA Exception Condition Meaning Comments EC-0001 Invalid text control. Invalid or unsupported function type in control sequence.
PTOCA-5-031	Invalid control sequence or initial text condition parameter.
PTOCA-5-032	Invalid or unsupported initial text condition parameter identifier.
PTOCA-5-033	Control sequence or initial text condition parameter is not in the
PTOCA-5-034	supported subset. EC-0103 Character box exceeds object space. A character has been positioned so that a portion of its character box
PTOCA-5-035	will exceed the object space in the I-direction or the B-direction. Caution - this exception condition is applicable only within a valid object
PTOCA-5-036	area. If the boundary of the object space coincides with or extends beyond the boundary of the object area, the appropriate data-stream exception may take precedence over this exception condition. EC-0201 Invalid LID in ESU. The active BSU LID is not the same as the LID specified in the ESU.
PTOCA-5-037	No active BSU LID when an ESU is processed.
PTOCA-5-038	EC-0401 The end of the object is encountered before a text suppression has ended. EC-0505 PTD unit base specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-0601 Nested BSU. BSU is encountered before the previous suppression has ended.
PTOCA-5-039	EC-0605 PTD $Xp$ - or $Yp$
PTOCA-5-040	–units per unit base specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-0705 PTD $Xp$ - or $Yp$
PTOCA-5-041	Table 18 PTOCA Exception Conditions (cont'd.) PTOCA Exception Condition Meaning Comments EC-0F01 Invalid text orientation in STO. Baseline or inline orientation specified is not a valid or supported value.
PTOCA-5-042	The I and Borientations are identical.
PTOCA-5-043	Neither the I-direction nor the B-direction is parallel to the $Xp$
PTOCA-5-044	–direction. EC-1001 SIM displacement specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1 101 SBI baseline increment specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1201 SIA adjustment or direction specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1301 AMB displacement specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1401 AMI displacement specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1403 Advancement of the baseline coordinate toward the I-axis is specified but is not supported. EC-1501 RMI increment specified is not a supported value. EC-1601 RMB increment specified is not a supported value. EC-1701 SVI increment specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-1802 Invalid Coded Font LID. The necessary mapping is not provided to support the specified coded
PTOCA-5-045	font. The specified coded font is not available to the receiver.
PTOCA-5-046	EC-1901 Invalid or unsupported RPS target count. The target count parameter for RPS is invalid or unsupported.
PTOCA-5-047	EC-1A01 RPS or TRN source string length error or UCT data length error. The data string length for TRN or RPS is an odd number. It must be
PTOCA-5-048	even for double-byte fonts. The byte count specified for code points following UCT is an odd
PTOCA-5-049	number. It must be even for double–byte encoded data.
PTOCA-5-050	Table 18 PTOCA Exception Conditions (cont'd.) PTOCA Exception Condition Meaning Comments EC-1A03 Invalid Unicode data. A high-order surrogate code value was not immediately followed by a
PTOCA-5-051	low-order surrogate code value. The high-order surrogate range is U+D800 through U+DBFF. A low-order surrogate code value was not immediately preceded by a
PTOCA-5-052	high-order surrogate code value. The low-order surrogate range is U+DC00 through U+DFFF. An illegal UTF-8 byte sequence, as defined in the Unicode 3.2
PTOCA-5-053	Specification, was specified. For a discussion of illegal UTF-8 byte sequences, see the Application Note. EC-1B01 RPS target string length error. The RPS repeat length is an odd number when a double-byte font is
PTOCA-5-054	active. It must be even for double-byte fonts. EC-1C01 Invalid control sequence class. The class of a X'2B' control sequence is not X'D3'.
PTOCA-5-055	EC-1E01 Invalid length for control sequence or initial text condition parameter. A required parameter has not been not specified.
PTOCA-5-056	Invalid control sequence or initial text condition parameter length.
PTOCA-5-057	Part of an optional parameter in a control sequence is missing.
PTOCA-5-058	A Coded Font LID has been omitted in a SCFL control sequence or in a
PTOCA-5-059	Coded Font Local ID initial text condition parameter. SVIcontrol sequence increment parameter is missing.
PTOCA-5-060	DBR or DIR length parameter is missing.
PTOCA-5-061	SIM displacement parameter is missing.
PTOCA-5-062	I-orientation parameter or B-orientation parameter is missing in an STO
PTOCA-5-063	control sequence. EC-1F01 RPS length error. The RPS control sequence length is four and the repeat length is not
PTOCA-5-064	Table 18 PTOCA Exception Conditions (cont'd.) PTOCA Exception Condition Meaning Comments EC-8202 DBR or DIR rule length specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-9801 BSU or ESU LID specified is not a valid or supported value. EC-9803 TBM error. Receiver is unable to support TBM by printing full size characters.
PTOCA-5-065	Receiver cannot support substitution character in the TBM field.
PTOCA-5-066	Temporary move size exceeds the device limitations.
PTOCA-5-067	Substitution method receiver cannot support multi-offset temporary
PTOCA-5-068	baselines. EC-9A01 OVS selected overstrike character that has an invalid character increment or is a non- printing character. Character increment of overstrike character is less than or equal to
PTOCA-5-069	zero. Character increment of overstrike character is less than the character-
PTOCA-5-070	box size. Overstrike character is a non-printing character.
PTOCA-5-071	EC-9B01 UCT parameter values for CTLNGTH, UCTVERS, BIDICT, or GLYPHCT are invalid. EC-9D01 Decryption is not available on this device. EC-9D02 Decryption reported an error. EC-9D03 No key information has been set for decryption.
PTOCA-6-001	Chapter 6. Compliance with PTOCA This chapter: Describes the base level of PTOCA
PTOCA-6-002	Describes the PT1 subset of PTOCA
PTOCA-6-003	Describes the PT2 subset of PTOCA
PTOCA-6-004	Describes the PT3 subset of PTOCA
PTOCA-6-005	Describes the PT4 subset of PTOCA
PTOCA-6-006	States general requirements for compliance
PTOCA-6-007	Base Level The mandatory base level contains functions and facilities required by all implementations. By itself the mandatory base level is not sufficient; it must always be supplemented by a higher subset such as PT1, PT2, or PT3. The base level represents the base set of functions defined within PTOCA. It is the minimum set of functions required to be supported in any environment, and consists of the following minimum general communication capabilities: Recognition of control sequences, chained or unchained
PTOCA-6-008	Interpretation and validation of the control sequence
PTOCA-6-009	Rejection of control sequences and parameters, including return of error data, that are not supported within
PTOCA-6-010	the supported subset Reporting, on request from the controlling environment, the supported features
PTOCA-6-011	Reporting exception conditions to the controlling environment
PTOCA-6-012	PT1 Subset The following table shows the control sequences that are valid for a PT1 subset compliant receiver, and the associated parameter ranges. The offset shown in the table indicates the beginning of the parameter data within the control sequence. Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT1 Range Notes AMB 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 AMI 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 BLN 6 BSU 4 LID X'01'-X'7F' DBR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-013	DIR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-014	ESU 4 LID X'01'-X'7F' NOP 4-256 IGNDATA 7 RMB 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RMI 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RPS 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 6-256 RPTDATA 8
PTOCA-6-015	SBI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 SCFL 4 LID X'00'-X'7F' 3 SIA 4-5 ADJSTMNT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 6 DIRECTION X'00' 9
PTOCA-6-016	SIM 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 STC 4-5 FRGCOLOR X'FF07' 3,5 6 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 3,10
PTOCA-6-017	STO 4-5 IORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3 6-7 BORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3
PTOCA-6-018	SVI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 TRN 4-256 TRNDATA 8 Notes: 1. This parameter is a signed binary number that may be positive or negative. Negative numbers are
PTOCA-6-019	expressed in twos-complement form. 2. The PTOCA range for RWI DTH is X'8000' - X'7FFF' plus a fractional value byte ranging from X'00' - X'FF'.
PTOCA-6-020	That is, the fractional values range from 1/2 measurement unit to 1/256 measurement unit. The PT1 subset range for RWIDTH is X'0000' - X'00C0' in bytes 6 and 7. Byte 8 is always X'00', unless bytes 6 and 7 are X'FFFF', in which case byte 8 is X'FF'. 3. The default indicator is allowed, meaning obtain a value from the hierarchy.
PTOCA-6-021	The range values shown assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, the measurement base is
PTOCA-6-022	assumed to be ten inches, and the $Xp$ -units per unit base and $Yp$ -units per unit base are assumed to be
PTOCA-6-023	14,400. If a different measurement unit is used, the correct range values can be determined using the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. 5. For the PTOCA range, see “Set Text Color (STC)”. The PT1 range is X'FF07'.
PTOCA-6-024	The Begin Line (BLN) control sequence has no parameters.
PTOCA-6-025	The No Operation (NOP) control sequence may contain any data that does not exceed the field length. The
PTOCA-6-026	data is ignored. 8. The Transparent Data (TRN) and Repeat String (RPS) control sequences may contain any data that does
PTOCA-6-027	not exceed the field length. However, the data will be presented as a character string. 9. The default indicator is not allowed for this parameter in this subset.
PTOCA-6-028	The STC PRECISION parameter has been retired; see “Retired Parameters”. New PTOCA
PTOCA-6-029	generators should not specify this parameter and new receivers should ignore it..
PTOCA-6-030	PT2 Subset The following table shows the control sequences that are valid for a PT2 subset compliant receiver, and the associated parameter ranges. The offset shown in the table indicates the beginning of the parameter data within the control sequence. Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT2 Range Notes AMB 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 AMI 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 BLN 6 BSU 4 LID X'01'-X'7F' DBR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-031	DIR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-032	ESU 4 LID X'01'-'X'7F' NOP 4-256 IGNDATA 7 OVS 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 3 5-6 OVERCHAR X'0000'-X'FFFF'
PTOCA-6-033	RMB 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RMI 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RPS 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 6-256 RPTDATA 8
PTOCA-6-034	SBI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 SCFL 4 LID X'00'-X'FE' 3 SIA 4-5 ADJSTMNT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 6 DIRECTION X'00'-X'01' 3
PTOCA-6-035	SIM 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 STC 4-5 FRGCOLOR X'0000', X'FF00', X'FF07', X'FFFF' 3,5 6 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 3,9
PTOCA-6-036	STO 4-5 IORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3 6-7 BORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3
PTOCA-6-037	SVI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 TBM 4 DIRECTION X'00'-X'03' 3 5 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 3
PTOCA-6-038	INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4
PTOCA-6-039	TRN 4-256 TRNDATA 8 USC 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 3
PTOCA-6-040	Notes: 1. This parameter is a signed binary number that may be positive or negative. Negative numbers are
PTOCA-6-041	expressed in twos-complement form. 2. The PTOCA range for RWI DTH is X'8000' - X'7FFF' plus a fractional value byte ranging from X'00' - X'FF'.
PTOCA-6-042	That is, the fractional values range from 1/2 measurement unit to 1/256 measurement unit. The PT2 subset range for RWIDTH is X'0000' - X'00C0' in bytes 6 and 7. Byte 8 is always X'00', unless bytes 6 and 7 are X'FFFF', in which case byte 8 is X'FF'. 3. The default indicator is allowed, meaning obtain a value from the hierarchy.
PTOCA-6-043	The range values shown assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, the measurement base is
PTOCA-6-044	assumed to be ten inches, and the $Xp$ -units per unit base and $Yp$ -units per unit base are assumed to be 14,400. If a different measurement unit is used, the correct range values can be determined using the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. 5. For the PTOCA range, see “Set Text Color (STC)”. The PT2 range is X'0000', X'FF00',
PTOCA-6-045	X'FF07', and X'FFFF'. 6. The Begin Line (BLN) control sequence has no parameters.
PTOCA-6-046	The No Operation (NOP) control sequence may contain any data that does not exceed the field length.
PTOCA-6-047	The Transparent Data (TRN) and Repeat String (RPS) control sequences may contain any data that does
PTOCA-6-048	not exceed the field length. However, the data is presented as a character string. 9. The STC PRECISION parameter has been retired; see “Retired Parameters”. New PTOCA
PTOCA-6-049	generators should not specify this parameter and new receivers should ignore it.
PTOCA-6-050	PT3 Subset The following table shows the control sequences that are valid for a PT3 subset compliant receiver, and the associated parameter ranges. The offset shown in the table indicates the beginning of the parameter data within the control sequence. Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT3 Range Notes AMB 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 AMI 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 4 BLN 6 BSU 4 LID X'01'-X'7F' DBR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-051	DIR 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 6-8 RWIDTH X'0000'-X'00C0' 1,2,3
PTOCA-6-052	ESU 4 LID X'01'-'X'7F' NOP 4-256 IGNDATA 7 OVS 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 3 5-6 OVERCHAR X'0000'-X'FFFF'
PTOCA-6-053	RMB 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RMI 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,4 RPS 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 6-256 RPTDATA 8
PTOCA-6-054	SBI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 SCFL 4 LID X'00'-X'FE' 3 SEC 5 10 1 1 12 13 14-17 COLSPCE COLSIZE1 COLSIZE2 COLSIZE3 COLSIZE4 COL Value X'01', X'04', X'06' X'08', X'40' X'01'-X'08', X'10' X'00'-X'08' X'00'-X'08' X'00'-X'08' Full range allowed by the color space SIA 4-5 ADJSTMNT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 6 DIRECTION X'00'-X'01' 3
PTOCA-6-055	SIM 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4 STC 4-5 FRGCOLOR X'0000', X'FF00', X'FF07', X'FFFF' 3,5 6 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 3,9
PTOCA-6-056	STO 4-5 IORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3 6-7 BORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 3
PTOCA-6-057	SVI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'0FFF' 3,4 TBM 4 DIRECTION X'00'-X'03' 3
PTOCA-6-058	Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT3 Range Notes 5 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 3
PTOCA-6-059	INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3,4
PTOCA-6-060	TRN 4-256 TRNDATA 8 USC 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 3 Notes: 1. This parameter is a signed binary number that may be positive or negative. Negative numbers are
PTOCA-6-061	expressed in twos-complement form. 2. The PTOCA range for RWI DTH is X'8000' - X'7FFF' plus a fractional value byte ranging from X'00' - X'FF'.
PTOCA-6-062	That is, the fractional values range from 1/2 measurement unit to 1/256 measurement unit. The PT3 subset range for RWIDTH is X'0000' - X'00C0' in bytes 6 and 7. Byte 8 is always X'00', unless bytes 6 and 7 are X'FFFF', in which case byte 8 is X'FF'. 3. The default indicator is allowed, meaning obtain a value from the hierarchy.
PTOCA-6-063	The range values shown assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, the measurement base is
PTOCA-6-064	assumed to be ten inches, and the $Xp$ -units per unit base and $Yp$ -units per unit base are assumed to be 14,400. If a different measurement unit is used, the correct range values can be determined using the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. 5. For the PTOCA range, see “Set Text Color (STC)”. The PT3 range is X'0000', X'FF00',
PTOCA-6-065	X'FF07', and X'FFFF'. 6. The Begin Line (BLN) control sequence has no parameters.
PTOCA-6-066	The No Operation (NOP) control sequence may contain any data that does not exceed the field length.
PTOCA-6-067	The Transparent Data (TRN) and Repeat String (RPS) control sequences may contain any data that does
PTOCA-6-068	not exceed the field length. However, the data is presented as a character string. 9. The STC PRECISION parameter has been retired; see “Retired Parameters”. New PTOCA
PTOCA-6-069	generators should not specify this parameter and new receivers should ignore it..
PTOCA-6-070	PT4 Subset The following table shows the control sequences that are valid for a PT4 subset compliant receiver, and the associated parameter ranges. The offset shown in the table indicates the beginning of the parameter data within the control sequence. Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT4 Range Notes AMB 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3 AMI 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 3 BLN 5 BSU 4 LID X'01'-X'7F' DBR 4-5 RLENGTH X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1, 3 6-7 8 RWIDTH X'8000'-X'7FFF' X'00'-X'FF' 1,2 DIR 4-5 RLENGTH X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,3 6-7 8 RWIDTH X'8000'-X'7FFF' X'00'-X'FF' 1,2 ESU 4 LID X'01'-'X'7F' GAR 4–253 (chained) ADVANCE X'0000'-'X'FFFF' 3 GIR 4–253 (chained) GLYPHID X'0000'-'X'FFFF' GLC 4-5 IADVNCE X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1, 3 6 OIDLGTH 0, 13-129
PTOCA-6-071	FFNLGTH 0-(255-(10+OIDLGTH))
PTOCA-6-072	-n FONTOID (first byte) X'06'
PTOCA-6-073	(n+1)–p FFONTNME valid UTF-16BE code points GOR 4–253 (chained) OFFSET X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1 NOP 4-256 IGNDATA 6 OVS 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 2 5-6 OVERCHAR X'0000'-X'FFFF'
PTOCA-6-074	RMB 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,3 RMI 4-5 INCRMENT X'8000'-X'7FFF' 1,3 RPS 4-5 RLENGTH X'0000'-X'7FFF' 6-256 RPTDATA 7
PTOCA-6-075	Control Sequence Offset (Unchained) Parameter PT4 Range Notes SIA 4-5 ADJSTMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 2,3 6 DIRECTION X'00'-X'01' 2
PTOCA-6-076	SIM 4-5 DSPLCMNT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 2,3 STC 4-5 FRGCOLOR X'0000'-X'0010', X'FF00'-X'FF08', X'FFFF' 2,4 6 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 2,8
PTOCA-6-077	STO 4-5 IORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 2 6-7 BORNTION X'0000', X'2D00', X'5A00', X'8700' 2
PTOCA-6-078	SVI 4-5 INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 2,3 TBM 4 DIRECTION X'00'-X'03' 2 5 PRECISION X'00'-X'01' 2
PTOCA-6-079	INCRMENT X'0000'-X'7FFF' 2,3
PTOCA-6-080	TRN 4-256 TRNDATA 7 UCT 9 USC 4 BYPSIDEN X'00'-X'0E' 2 Notes: 1. This parameter is a signed binary number that may be positive or negative. Negative numbers are
PTOCA-6-081	expressed in twos-complement form. 2. The default indicator is allowed, meaning obtain a value from the hierarchy.
PTOCA-6-082	The range values shown assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, the measurement base is
PTOCA-6-083	assumed to be ten inches, and the $Xp$ -units per unit base and $Yp$ -units per unit base are assumed to be 14,400. If a different measurement unit is used, the correct range values can be determined using the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. 4. For the PTOCA range, see “Set Text Color (STC)”. The PT4 range is the full Standard OCA
PTOCA-6-084	Color Value Table found in the MO:DCA Reference. 5. The Begin Line (BLN) control sequence has no parameters.
PTOCA-6-085	The No Operation (NOP) control sequence may contain any data that does not exceed the field length.
PTOCA-6-086	The Transparent Data (TRN) and Repeat String (RPS) control sequences may contain any data that does
PTOCA-6-087	not exceed the field length. However, the data is presented as a character string. 8. The STC PRECISION parameter has been retired; see “Retired Parameters”. New PTOCA
PTOCA-6-088	generators should not specify this parameter and new receivers should ignore it. 9. The UCT must be chained to a GAR or GOR and is not rendered; all parameters are ignored.
PTOCA-6-089	General Requirements for Compliance In claiming support as a PTOCA receiver, a product is stating that it has identified the subsets sufficient for its needs, and has implemented all mandatory and optional control sequences, parameters, and ranges within those subsets, including support of the PTOCA default values specified for those control sequences and parameters. A receiver may also support additional function beyond the PTOCA subset that it claims to support. In claiming support as a PTOCA generator, a product is stating that it has identified which subset is sufficient for its needs, and that the Presentation Text object content it produces is limited to the control sequences and parameters defined in that subset. Additionally, it is stating that it has not violated the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic restrictions specified in PTOCA. There is no requirement that any control sequence or parameter must appear in the object. A receiver need not check the Presentation Text object for compliance to the PTOCA subset beyond what the receiver requires for the processing that represents its function. A printer, for example, normally checks all the control sequences, parameters, and ranges within the object it is presenting. But a transform product might only need to check the structured field introducers. A receiver may optionally provide warnings if it detects non- compliance. General Requirements for Compliance
PTOCA-A-001	Appendix A. MO:DCA Environment This appendix describes how Presentation Text objects may be included within a MO:DCA document for the purpose of interchanging Presentation Text objects between a generating node and a receiving node. See Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004, for a full description of the MO:DCA architecture. The Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) and Presentation Text Data (PTX) structured fields, which carry Presentation Text objects in MO:DCA architecture documents, are defined in the following pages. To guarantee interchange, a MO:DCA document carrying a Presentation Text object must include all information related to the object. The MO:DCA document must therefore contain not only the definition of the Presentation Text object, but it must also provide linkage to the resources the object references. The discussion of MO:DCA structured fields is included in this appendix solely for setting the context of their use by PTOCA. Compliance with MO:DCA Interchange Sets When Presentation Text objects are interchanged with the purpose of outputting the objects on a display , printer , or other output device, it is very important that visual fidelity be maintained as far as possible. In an attempt to satisfy this objective, PTOC A defines the following for the MO:DCA environment: • A set of rules that must be followed by all generators when constructing Presentation Text objects.
PTOCA-A-002	• A set of Presentation Text processing capabilities that are guaranteed to be supported by all receivers.
PTOCA-A-003	In order to comply with a particular MO:DCA Interchange Set, products that generate Presentation Text objects must only generate objects that contain Presentation Text items and values defined in that interchange set. Including items or values not in the interchange set can result in processing exceptions being raised by the receiving processor , and exception actions being taken. However , a generator must not rely on a receiver taking these actions. In order to conform to a particular MO:DCA Interchange Set, products that receive Presentation Text objects and convert them using a processor for output to some device are required to support all the Presentation Text facilities defined in that interchange set. It is optional whether the processor in the receiving node checks each Presentation Text object for compliance with the relevant interchange set. A receiver can optionally raise warnings, in the form of errors, if a non- compliant Presentation Text object is detected. The Presentation Text object space is the presentation space within which the object generator may position graphic characters without error , and it is the responsibility of the generator to ensure that the graphic characters it places in the object space are positioned so that they do not exceed the object space.
PTOCA-A-004	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-A-005	Presentation Text Structured Fields in the MO:DCA Architecture Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) The PTOCA Presentation Text Data Descriptor is carried in the MO:DCA Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) structured field. Structured Field Introducer SF Length SF Identifier X'D3B19B' Flags Reserved X'0000' PTD Data The following table describes the contents of the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) structured field in the MO:DCA architecture, which has a structured field identifier of X'D3B19B'. Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE XPBASE X'00'–X'01' Unit base for X axis; must
PTOCA-A-006	be the same as the unit base for Y axis: X'00' Ten inches X'01' Ten centimeters M N N 1 CODE YPBASE X'00' –X'01' Unit base for Y axis; must
PTOCA-A-007	be the same as the unit base for X axis: X'00' Ten inches X'01' Ten centimeters M N N 2–3 UBIN XPUNITVL X'0001' – X'7FFF' X p -units per unit base M N N 4–5 UBIN YPUNITVL X'0001' – X'7FFF' Y p -units per unit base M N N 6–8 UBIN XPEXTENT X'000001' – X'007FFF' X p -extent. See notes 1 and 2. M N N 9–1 1 UBIN YPEXTENT X'000001' – X'007FFF' Y p -extent. See notes 1 and 2. M N N 12–13 TEXTFLAGS Reserved. See note 3. O Y N 14–end of PTD TXTCONDS Initial text conditions O Y See note 4. Notes: 1. The range values shown assume a measurement unit of 1/1440 inch. That is, the measurement base is ten
PTOCA-A-008	inches, and the X p - and Y p -units per unit base are 14,400. If it is necessary to convert to a diffe rent measurement unit, please see the conversion routine described in “Interpreting Ranges”. 2. The default indicator is not allowed for this parameter in this subset.
PTOCA-A-009	The TEXTFLAGS parameter is reserved. Generators should set this parameter to X'0000', and receivers
PTOCA-A-010	should ignore it. 4. See the description of the control sequence that specifies the initial text condition.
PTOCA-A-011	Presentation Text Structured Fields
PTOCA-A-012	PTOCA Reference 165 When the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) is included in the Active Environment Group (AEG) for a MO:DCA page, the PTOCA object space and object area coincide with the page presentation space, therefore the size of the Presentation Text object space is set equal to the size of the page presentation space. When a Presentation Text object is transformed into an IPDS data stream, the PTD parameters are mapped to IPDS Logical Page Descriptor (LPD) command parameters. Optionally , some PTD parameters may be transformed into control sequences as part of an IPDS Write Text command. When the PTD is specified in the OEG of a MO:DCA text object, the extents of the text object space are defined by the XPEXTENT and YPEXTENT parameters and can be set to any value in the allowed range. Architecture Note: When the PTD is included in the AEG for a MO:DCA page, some AFP print servers require that the measurement units in the PTD match the measurement units in the Page Descriptor (PGD). It is therefore strongly recommended that whenever the PTD is included in the AEG, the same measurement units are specified in both the PTD and PGD. The coded font information from the MO:DCA Map Coded Font (MCF) and Map Data Resource (MDR) structured fields is used to determine what the Load Font Equivalence command content should be in the IPDS environment. See Appendix B, “IPDS Environment” for more information about the IPDS environment. Initial text conditions are specified by including the control sequence that contains the parameter to be initialized. It is recommended that exactly one chain be used to specify initial text conditions. The first control sequence that specifies an initial text condition parameter starts with the X'2BD3' prefix and class code and indicates chaining with an odd function type (low-order bit is B'1') if other control sequences follow . All control sequences that follow , except for the last, are chained control sequences that start with their length byte (not with X'2BD3') and have an odd function type. The last control sequence in the chain starts with the length byte but indicates termination of the chain with an even function type (low-order bit is B'0'). For a description of chaining, see “Control Sequence Chaining”. Table 19 shows which control sequence may be used to specify a particular initial text condition parameter . Control sequences are optional and may appear in any order . If a control sequence appears multiple times, the last occurrence determines the setting of the initial text condition. Control sequences that are not listed in this table are treated as NOPs. Table 19. PTOCA Initial Text Conditions in a MO:DCA Environment Initial Text Condition Parameter Control Sequence Baseline Increment Set Baseline Increment (SBI) Coded Font Local ID Set Coded Font Local (SCFL) Extended Text Color Set Extended Text Color (SEC) Initial Baseline Coordinate Absolute Move Baseline (AMB) Initial Inline Coordinate Absolute Move Inline (AMI) Inline Margin Set Inline Margin (SIM) Intercharacter Adjustment Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA) Text Color Set Text Color (STC) Text Orientation Set Text Orientation (STO) Architecture Note: The Extended Text Color parameter is not supported as an initial text condition in IPDS environments when text is specified as text-major , that is, when the PTD for the text is specified in the AEG for the page. This parameter is supported in IPDS environments when the text is specified in a text object with OEG and the PTD is specified in the OEG. Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD)
PTOCA-A-013	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-A-014	Architecture Note: The following format 1 version of the Presentation Text Data Descriptor is a coexistence MO:DCA structured field and may only be used for migration purposes. The PTD format 1 structured field is not allowed in the OEG of a MO:DCA presentation text object. Structured Field Introducer SF Length SF Identifier X'D3A69B' Flags Reserved X'0000' PTD Data Offset Type Name Range Meaning M/O Def Ind 0 CODE XPBASE X'00' Unit base for X axis; ten
PTOCA-A-015	inches M N N 1 CODE YPBASE X'00' Unit base for Y axis; ten
PTOCA-A-016	inches M N N 2–3 UBIN XPUNITVL X'0960' – X'3840' X p -units per unit base M N N 4–5 UBIN YPUNITVL X'0960' – X'3840' Y p -units per unit base M N N 6–7 UBIN XPEXTENT X'0001' – X'7FFF' X p -extent M N N 8–9 UBIN YPEXTENT X'0001' – X'7FFF' Y p -extent M N N 10–1 1 BITS TEXTFLAGS Reserved. Must be set to zeros O Y N Presentation Text Data (PTX) Structured Field Introducer SF Length SF Identifier X'D3EE9B' Flags Reserved X'0000' PTD Data The Presentation Text Data (PTX) structured field has a structured field identifier of X'D3EE9B'. It contains the graphic characters and the control sequences that position the graphic characters. The contents of the PTX structured field, that is, graphic characters and control sequences, may be included directly into one or more IPDS Write Text (WT) commands by removing the MO:DCA structured field introducer and replacing it with the IPDS WT command syntax. The length information from the PTX structured field must be changed to reflect the correct length in the WT command. Presentation text data can span multiple PTX structured fields and can be split on any byte boundary . Therefore, a control sequence or chain of control sequences, or a sequence of single- or multi-byte code points can start in one PTX and continue or terminate in a following PTX. Presentation Text Data (PTX)
PTOCA-A-017	PTOCA Reference 167 Presentation Exception Conditions An implementation of the MO:DCA architecture may detect and report PTOCA exception conditions as required to perform or assure the function for which it was designed. The MO:DCA architecture expects a PTOCA processor to handle exception conditions, either by using PTOCA standard actions or by recovering in some other manner . Presentation Suppression Handling Suppression of graphic characters is activated by referencing the local ID from the Begin Suppression and End Suppression control sequences with a keyword in the MO:DCA Medium Modification Control (MMC) structured field. The local ID may also be mapped to a global name with a Map Suppression (MSU) structured field. For further information, please see the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004. Additional Related Structured Fields Map Coded Font (MCF): Font information for FOCA-based fonts is provided by the Map Coded Font (MCF) structured field which maps the LID parameter of the Set Coded Font Local control sequence to a FOCA font. Map Data Resource (MDR): Font information for TrueType/OpenType fonts is provided by the Map Data Resource (MDR) structured field which maps the LID parameter of the Set Coded Font Local control sequence to a TrueType/OpenType font. For further information about these structured fields, please refer to Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference, AFPC-0004. Additional Related Structured Fields
PTOCA-A-018	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-B-001	Appendix B. IPDS Environment The Intelligent Printer Data Stream (IPDS) provides the printer subsystem environment for Presentation Text objects. This appendix describes: • The context of Presentation Text objects in the IPDS environment; as either text-major text or as independent
PTOCA-B-002	text objects • A comparison of PTOCA and IPDS exception conditions
PTOCA-B-003	• IPDS commands specific to presentation text
PTOCA-B-004	For further information about the IPDS Architecture, refer to Intelligent Printer Data Stream Reference, AFPC- 0001. IPDS Presentation Text Presentation Text objects are transmitted to print devices acting as receivers as part of an IPDS data stream so that a presentation on the print device may be made with visual fidelity . The IPDS Architecture is expressly designed to support all points addressable (APA) printing function that allows text, image, graphics, and bar code to be positioned and presented at any point on the printed page. Text is described to the IPDS printers in terms of Presentation Text data within Write Text commands. The Presentation Text data is comprised of graphic characters and control sequences in the same format as carried in MO:DCA data streams except that the containing IPDS structure has a diffe rent syntax. The printers that receive the Presentation Text object are expected to process the object contents accurately according to the semantic definitions for the supported PTOC A subset. IPDS Architecture provides the following for the object: • Command structure and syntax
PTOCA-B-005	• Initial conditions for the object
PTOCA-B-006	• A means of reporting exception conditions
PTOCA-B-007	• A means of resolving fonts and suppression identifiers
PTOCA-B-008	IPDS Architecture provides positioning information for the object. The object does not carry the size and shape of the physical medium or information about object positioning. The object does not control what part of its object space is to be presented or what part will fit into the logical page specified by the data stream. The object expresses the exact boundaries that the graphic characters it positions in the object space will require if they are to be presented without error . The logical page may also be used to provide that boundary . Text data can be positioned anywhere on the logical page in two diff erent ways: 1. All IPDS printers allow text to be placed directly within a logical page using the Write Text command. The
PTOCA-B-009	logical page can also contain other presentation objects specified with other IPDS commands either before or after a Write Text command. With this method, called “text major”, there is no text object area, and text may be printed anywhere within the valid printable area. For text-major text, the text presentation space is the logical page. Furthermore, object areas for other objects may be positioned with respect to the text. 2. Some IPDS printers support text objects (in addition to the text-major concept). In this case, the Write Text
PTOCA-B-010	Control command defines a presentation space, object area, and mapping option. The text data is carried within one or more Write Text commands. Architecture Note: The Extended Text Color parameter is not supported as an initial text condition in IPDS environments for text-major text. This parameter is supported in IPDS environments when the text is specified in a text object.
PTOCA-B-011	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-B-012	IPDS Text Command Set Presentation Text Data Descriptor for Text-Major Text The following table describes the contents of the PTOCA Presentation Text Data Descriptor and the corresponding parameter location within the IPDS Logical Page Descriptor (LPD) command. The offset in the table indicates the beginning of the parameter data relative to the beginning of the data portion of the LPD command. This table reflects the descriptor subset syntax for the Presentation Text Data Descriptor . PTOCA Parameter IPDS LPD Offset Notes UNITBASE 0 XPUNITVL 2-3 YPUNITVL 4-5 XPEXTENT 7-9 5 YPEXTENT 1 1-13 5 TEXTFLAGS 3 Initial Text Condition Parameters Text Orientation: IORNTION BORNTION 24-25 26-27 2 2 Initial Inline Coordinate 28-29 5 Initial Baseline Coordinate 30-31 5 Inline Margin 32-33 2 Intercharacter Adjustment: ADJSTMNT DIRCTION 34-35 2 4 Baseline Increment 38-39 2 Coded Font Local ID 40 2 Text Color: FRGCOLOR 41-42 1,2 Notes: 1. If a receiver cannot provide the color specified by FRGCOLOR, it may substitute values from Table 13 on
PTOCA-B-013	page 103 defined in the STC control sequence. 2. The default indicator is allowed, meaning use the printer default.
PTOCA-B-014	The TEXTFLAGS parameter is reserved. This parameter is not used in the IPDS environment.
PTOCA-B-015	DIRCTION is always defaulted to X'00', that is, the positive direction, so this parameter is not carried in the
PTOCA-B-016	Logical Page Descriptor (LPD) command. 5. The default indicator is not allowed for this parameter in this subset.
PTOCA-B-017	IPDS Presentation Text Data Descriptor for Text Objects When a text object is used within an IPDS data stream, the PTOCA Presentation Text Data Descriptor is carried within the Write Text Control (WTC) command. This portion of the WTC command is called the Text IPDS Text Command Set
PTOCA-B-018	PTOCA Reference 171 Data Descriptor (TDD) and specifies parameters that define the text presentation space size and initial text default conditions. The format of the TDD is as follows: Offset Type Name Range Meaning Required 0–1 UBIN Length X'0014' – end of TDD Length of TDD, including this field X'0014' – end of TDD 2–3 CODE SDF ID X'A69B' Self-defining-field ID X'A69B' 4–5 X'0000' Reserved X'0000' 6 CODE Unit base X'00'
PTOCA-B-019	X'01' X'02' Ten inches Ten centimeters Retired item 54 X'00' 7 X'00' Reserved X'00'
PTOCA-B-020	8–9 UBIN XUPUB X'0001' – X'7FFF' X t units per unit base X'3840' 10–1 1 UBIN YUPUB X'0001' – X'7FFF' Y t units per unit base X'3840' 12–14 UBIN X t extent X'000001' – X'007FFF' X t extent of the text presentation space in L- units X'000001' – X'007FFF' 15–17 UBIN Y t extent X'000001' – X'007FFF' Y t extent of the text presentation space in L- units X'000001' – X'007FFF' 18–19 BITS Text flags B'00...00' Reserved for text flags B'00...00' 20 to end of TDD Initial text conditions Initial text conditions, in the same syntax as bytes 14 to end of the MO:DCA PTD found in the table under “Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD)” Presentation Text Data Presentation Text data, which contains the graphic characters and the control sequences that position the graphic characters, is carried in the IPDS Write Text (WT) command. The subsets of PTOC A that are used by IPDS printers are the PT1, PT2, PT3, and PT4 subsets. Notice that each subset contains all of the lower number subsets; for example, PT3 contains all of PT2 (and therefore all of PT1). The contents of the PTX structured field in a MO:DCA architecture data stream, that is, graphic characters and control sequences, may be included directly into one or more IPDS Write Text (WT) commands. Remove the MO:DCA structured field introducer , replace it with the IPDS WT command syntax, and correct the length information to reflect the length of the WT command. Presentation Text data can span multiple WT commands. That is, a control sequence or chain of control sequences can be started in the data sent by one WT command and can be completed in the data sent by the WT commands that follow . A WT command may end in the middle of an embedded control sequence or a double-byte code point. In this event, an exception results if any commands other than Execute Order Anystate, No Operation, Set Home State, or Sense Type and Model are received before the next WT command. Presentation Exception Conditions The IPDS Architecture defines its own exception condition codes, called exception IDs, which consist of three bytes. PTOCA exception condition codes are mapped to IPDS exception IDs by mapping the two-byte PTOCA code to the last two bytes of the IPDS exception code. In most cases, this mapping is one-to-one. Where it is Presentation Exception Conditions
PTOCA-B-021	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-B-022	not, the IPDS exception ID overrides the PTOC A exception condition code. The IPDS Architecture also defines its own exception responses. In some cases, this exception response is the same as the standard exception action defined by PTOCA. Where it is not, the IPDS exception response overrides the PTOCA standard exception action. Table 20 shows the mapping of PTOCA exception condition codes to IPDS exception IDs. Table 20. PTOCA Exception Conditions in an IPDS Environment PTOCA Exception Condition Code IPDS Exception ID EC-0001 0200..01 EC-0103 08C1..00 for text major 0201..03 for text objects
PTOCA-B-023	EC-0201 0202..01 EC-0401 0204..01 EC-0505 0264..02 EC-0601 0206..01 EC-0605 0260..02 EC-0705 0261..02 EC-0C01 020C..01 EC-0E02 020E..02 EC-0E03 020E..03 EC-0E04 020E..04 EC-0E05 020E..05 EC-0F01 020F ..01 EC-1001 0210..01 EC-1 101 021 1..01 EC-1201 0212..01 EC-1301 0213..01 EC-1401 0214..01 EC-1403 0214..03 EC-1501 0215..01 EC-1601 0216..01 EC-1701 0217..01 EC-1802 0218..02 EC-1901 0219..01 EC-1A01 021A..01 EC-1A03 021A..03 EC-1B01 021B..01 EC-1C01 021C..01 EC-1E01 021E..01 EC-1F01 021F ..01 EC-2100 0821..00 EC-3F02 023F ..02 EC-5803 0258..03 Presentation Exception Conditions
PTOCA-B-024	PTOCA Reference 173 Table 20 PTOCA Exception Conditions in an IPDS Environment (cont'd.) PTOCA Exception Condition Code IPDS Exception ID EC-6802 0268..02 EC-6902 0269..02 EC-6A02 026A..02 EC-6B02 026B..02 EC-8002 0280..02 EC-8202 0282..02 EC-9801 0298..01 EC-9803 0298..03 EC-9A01 029A..01 EC-9B01 029B..01 EC-9D01 029D..01 EC-9D02 029D..02 EC-9D03 029D..03 Additional Related Commands The following description is an overview . For further information about these commands, please refer to Intelligent Printer Data Stream Reference, AFPC-0001. Sense Type and Model (STM): Requests information from the printer that identifies the type and model of the device and the command sets supported. The information requested is returned in the Special Data Area of the Acknowledge Reply to the STM command. The command sets and data levels supported, such as PT1, are also returned as part of the acknowledgement data. XOH Obtain Printer Characteristics (XOH OPC): Requests information from the printer that identifies characteristics of the device. The characteristics include information about the printable area currently available, coded font resolution, and color support. XOA Request Resource List (XOA RRL): Requests the printer to return a specified list of available resources (coded fonts, overlays, and page segments) in the Acknowledge Reply to this command. This information is provided for use in resource management functions. Load Font Equivalence (LFE): This command is sent to the printer to map the LID parameter of the Set Coded Font Local control sequence to the coded font's Host Assigned ID to select the font and font attributes to be used by the printer . The coded fonts do not have to exist in the printer when the printer receives this command. The mapping function provided by this command is independent of the specific font technology employed by the printer . For example, the device may resolve the mapping to stored font patterns downloaded from the host or to permanently resident font patterns. The coded font resource used for Presentation Text objects may be used by other data objects, such as graphics, as well. Load Equivalence (LE) and Load Copy Control (LCC): The LE command permits physical values embedded in printer data to be referenced externally using different values, and the LCC command specifies external suppression values to be used in conjunction with the presentation text. These two functions are used to control the suppression function in PTOCA. Additional Related Commands
PTOCA-B-025	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-B-026	Suppression is started by external suppression values specified in the current Load Copy Control (LCC) Command. The external suppression value works with the LID parameter in two ways: • The external suppression value maps to the LID parameter of the BSU control sequence. For example, if the
PTOCA-B-027	external value is X'0A', the presentation text identified with the LID X'0A' is suppressed. • The external suppression value maps to the LID through an equivalence table, using the current Load
PTOCA-B-028	Equivalence (LE) command. For example, if the external value is X'0B', the LE table may define the following equivalences: X'0B'=X'01', X'0B'=X'02', X'0B'=X'03'. Thus, the external value X'0B' identifies presentation text marked with LID values X'01', X'02', and X'03' for suppression. If no external suppression values are started by the LCC command, the BSU and ESU control sequences are processed as No Operation control sequences. Exception conditions defined for BSU or ESU control sequences are detected by the printer whether or not an external suppression value is specified by the LCC command. During suppression, the printer performs all composition actions, including field checking, and processes all control sequences, such as SCFL, RMI, AMI, DIR, and so on. The printer can use a single suppression LID for more than one Begin and End Suppression pair if the LIDs are all mapped to the same external value. For example, if LID values of X'06', X'07', and X'09' from BSU, ESU control sequence pairs are mapped to an external value of X'02' from a Load Copy Control (LCC) command by an appropriate LE command received by the printer , the presentation text marked by the three LID values will be suppressed by the single value of X'02'. BSU, ESU pairs outside an overlay have no effe ct within the overlay , and BSU, ESU pairs within an overlay have no effect outside the overlay . Font Commands The IPDS architecture provides the ability to manage and use a wide variety of font resources. These font resources can be classified into two major categories: coded font components and data-object-font components. Coded fonts and their component parts are defined within the Font Object Content Architecture (FOCA); data-object-font components include the FOCA code page, TrueType/OpenType fonts, and TrueType/ OpenType collections. TrueType/OpenType fonts use an outline font technology as do FOCA outline fonts. The FOCA and IPDS architectures also include support for raster fonts and a very simple type of font called a symbol set. The following IPDS commands are used with TrueType/OpenType fonts and collections: • Activate Resource (AR)
PTOCA-B-029	• Deactivate Data-Object-Font Component (DDOFC)
PTOCA-B-030	• Deactivate Font (DF)
PTOCA-B-031	• Load Code Page (LCP)
PTOCA-B-032	• Load Code Page Control (LCPC)
PTOCA-B-033	• Write Object Container Control (WOCC)
PTOCA-B-034	• Write Object Container (WOC)
PTOCA-B-035	• XOH Erase Residual Font Data (ERFD)
PTOCA-B-036	• XOH Erase Residual Print Data (ERPD)
PTOCA-B-037	The following IPDS commands are used with FOCA outline fonts: • Activate Resource (AR)
PTOCA-B-038	• Deactivate Font (DF)
PTOCA-B-039	• Load Code Page (LCP)
PTOCA-B-040	• Load Code Page Control (LCPC)
PTOCA-B-041	• Load Font (LF)
PTOCA-B-042	• Load Font Character Set Control (LFCSC)
PTOCA-B-043	PTOCA Reference 175 • Load Font Equivalence (LFE)
PTOCA-B-044	• XOH Erase Residual Font Data (ERFD)
PTOCA-B-045	The following IPDS commands are used with FOCA raster fonts: • Activate Resource (AR)
PTOCA-B-046	• Deactivate Font (DF)
PTOCA-B-047	• Load Font (LF)
PTOCA-B-048	• Load Font Control (LFC)
PTOCA-B-049	• Load Font Equivalence (LFE)
PTOCA-B-050	• Load Font Index (LFI)
PTOCA-B-051	• XOH Erase Residual Font Data (ERFD)
PTOCA-B-052	The following IPDS commands are used with symbol set fonts: • Activate Resource (AR)
PTOCA-B-053	• Deactivate Font (DF)
PTOCA-B-054	• Load Font Equivalence (LFE)
PTOCA-B-055	• Load Symbol Set (LSS)
PTOCA-B-056	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-001	Appendix C. PTOCA Retired Functions Introduction This appendix: • Describes retired functions that may occur in a PTOCA object
PTOCA-C-002	General The objective in defining retired functions is twofold: (1) to allow existing applications to run unchanged, and (2) to provide a clear growth direction for future applications. Retired Functions Retired functions are control sequences and parameters whose use has been retired except for specific products. Only these specific products may use these functions. All other products should not use these functions, that is, generators should not generate these functions and receivers may ignore them. Retired Parameters STC Precision Parameter (Byte 6, Name PRECSION) The use of this parameter is restricted to pre-year 2000 AFP applications and printers. The PRECSION parameter is optional on the STC (byte 6), and specifies how the receiver should process colors that are syntactically valid but not supported by the receiver . If PRECSION is X'00', the receiver must support the color selected by FRGCOLOR as specified. If the color is not supported, exception condition EC- 5803 exists. The standard action in this case is to use X'FF07'. If PRECSION is X'01', and if the FRGCOLOR
PTOCA-C-003	value is not supported by the receiver , a default action is allowed. The receiver may use a substitute color or X'FF07'. If the FRGCOLOR value is not syntactically valid, exception condition EC-5803 exists, regardless of the value for the PRECSION parameter . The PRECSION parameter is modal, and X'00' is the default. This parameter supports the default indicator (X'FF'), which means its value is provided by the hierarchy , as follows: 1. Value set by Text Color initial text condition parameter in Descriptor
PTOCA-C-004	PTOCA default - X'00'
PTOCA-C-005	If the value of the PRECSION parameter is not valid, EC-5803 exists. The standard action is to ignore the parameter and continue presentation with the value determined according to the hierarchy . The PRECSION parameter also defines the hierarchy for determining the presentation process default color attribute value (FRGCOLOR = X'FFFF'). If PRECSION is X'00', the following order applies: 1. Value previously set by Text Color initial text condition parameter in descriptor
PTOCA-C-006	Data stream specified value
PTOCA-C-007	Receiver's best possible value
PTOCA-C-008	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-009	If PRECSION is X'01', the following order applies: 1. Receiver's best possible value
PTOCA-C-010	Value previously set by Text Color initial text condition parameter in descriptor
PTOCA-C-011	Data stream specified value
PTOCA-C-012	Copyright © AFP Consortium 1997, 2025 179 Notices The AFP Consortium or consortium member companies might have patents or pending patent applications covering subject matter described in this document. The furnishing of this document does not give you any license to these patents. The following statement does not apply to the United Kingdom or any other country where such provisions are inconsistent with local law: AFP Consortium PROVIDES THIS PUBLICA TION “AS IS” WITHOUT W ARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO , THE IMPLIED W ARRANTIES OF NON-INFRINGEMENT , MERCHANT ABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A P ARTICULAR PURPOSE. Some states do not allow disclaimer of express or implied warranties in certain transactions, therefore, this statement might not apply to you. This publication could include technical inaccuracies or typographical errors. Changes are periodically made to the information herein; these changes will be incorporated in new editions of the publication. The AFP Consortium might make improvements and/or changes in the architecture described in this publication at any time without notice. Any references in this publication to We b sites are provided for convenience only and do not in any manner serve as an endorsement of those We b sites. The materials at those Web sites are not part of the materials for this architecture and use of those Web sites is at your own risk. The AFP Consortium may use or distribute any information you supply in any way it believes appropriate without incurring any obligation to you. This information contains examples of data and reports used in daily business operations. To illustrate them in a complete manner , some examples include the names of individuals, companies, brands, or products. These names are fictitious and any similarity to the names and addresses used by an actual business enterprise is entirely coincidental.
PTOCA-C-013	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-014	T rademarks These terms are trademarks or registered trademarks of Ricoh Co., Ltd., in the United States, other countries, or both: ACMA Advanced Function Presentation AFP AFPCC AFP Color Consortium AFP Color Management Architecture Bar Code Object Content Architecture BCOCA CMOCA Color Management Object Content Architecture InfoPrint Intelligent Printer Data Stream IPDS Mixed Object Document Content Architecture MO:DCA Ricoh The following terms are trademarks of other companies: Apple and the Apple logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Apple Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries. AFPC and AFP Consortium are trademarks of the AFP Consortium. International Business Machines Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both: IBM Microsoft, Windows, Windows NT , and the Windows logo are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both. Other company , product, or service names might be trademarks or service marks of others.
PTOCA-C-015	Copyright © AFP Consortium 1997, 2025 181 Glossary This glossary contains terms that apply to the Advanced Function Presentation (AFP) Architecture and also terms that apply to other related presentation architectures. Note: Only changes having to do with newly-added PTOCA functionality in this edition are marked in color with a colored revision bar to the left. All other changes—terms or definitions that have been added, deleted, or reworded—are not marked. If you do not find the term that you are looking for , please refer to the IBM Dictionary of Computing, document number ZC20-1699 or the InfoPrint Dictionary of Printing. The following definitions are provided as supporting information only , and are not intended to be used as a substitute for the semantics described in the body of this reference. A absolute coordinate. One of the coordinates that identify the location of an addressable point with respect to the origin of a specified coordinate system. Contrast with relative coordinate. absolute move. A method used to designate a new presentation position by specifying the distance from the designated axes to the new presentation position. The reference for locating the new presentation position is a fixed position as opposed to the current presentation position. absolute positioning. The establishment of a position within a coordinate system as an offset from the coordinate system origin. Contrast with relative positioning. abstract profile. An ICC profile that represents abstract transforms and does not represent any device model. Color transformations using abstract profiles are performed from PCS to PCS. Abstract profiles cannot be embedded in images. Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1). A notation for defining data structures and data types. The notation is defined in international standard ISO/IEC 8824(E). See also object identifier . ACK. See Positive Acknowledge Reply . Acknowledge Reply . A printer-to-host reply that returns printer information or reports exceptions. An Acknowledge Reply can be positive or negative. See also Positive Acknowledge Reply and Negative Acknowledge Reply . Acknowledgment Request. A request from the host for information from the printer . An example of an Acknowledgment Request is the use of the acknowledgment-required flag by a host system to request an Acknowledge Reply from an attached printer . acknowledgment-required flag (ARQ). A flag that requests a printer to return an Acknowledge Reply . The acknowledgment-required flag is bit zero of an IPDS command's flag byte. active coded font. The coded font that is currently being used by a product to process text. additive primary colors. Red, green, and blue light, transmitted in video monitors and televisions. When used in various degrees of intensity and variation, they create all other colors of light; when superimposed equally , they create white. Contrast with subtractive primary colors. addressable position. A position in a presentation space or on a physical medium that can be identified by a coordinate from the coordinate system of the presentation space or physical medium. See also picture element. Synonymous with position. Advanced Function Presentation (AFP). An open architecture for the management of presentable information that is developed by the AFP Consortium (AFPC). AFP comprises a number of data stream and data object architectures: • Mixed Object Document Content Architecture (MO:DCA);
PTOCA-C-016	formerly referred to as AFPDS • Intelligent Printer Data Stream (IPDS)
PTOCA-C-017	• AFP Line Data Architecture
PTOCA-C-018	• Bar Code Object Content Architecture (BCOCA)
PTOCA-C-019	• Color Management Object Content Architecture
PTOCA-C-020	(CMOCA) • Font Object Content Architecture (FOCA)
PTOCA-C-021	• Graphics Object Content Architecture for AFP (AFP
PTOCA-C-022	GOCA) • Image Object Content Architecture (IOCA)
PTOCA-C-023	• Metadata Object Content Architecture (MOCA)
PTOCA-C-024	• Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA)
PTOCA-C-025	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-026	AFP . See Advanced Function Presentation. AFP archive. See AFP/A. AFP Consortium (AFPC). A formal open standards body that develops and maintains AFP architecture. Information about the consortium can be found at www.afpconsortium.org. AFP data stream. A presentation data stream that is processed in AFP environments. The MO:DCA architecture defines the strategic AFP interchange data stream. The IPDS architecture defines the strategic AFP printer data stream. AFPDS. A term formerly used to identify the composed- page MO:DCA-based data stream interchanged in AFP environments. See also MO:DCA and AFP data stream. AFP environment. Wherever the AFP architecture is used in any way; by an AFP vendor , an AFP customer , or any combination thereof. AFP GOCA. A subset of the GOCA architecture, originally defined by IBM, specifically designed for AFP environments. See Graphics Object Content Architecture (GOCA). AFP Line Data Architecture. An AFP architecture that controls formatting of line data using a Page Definition (PageDef). AFP T agging. (1) Associating extra information, contained in a metadata object, with a given piece of AFP data. Among other uses, such information could enable users with vision impairments or other restrictions to make full use of the content provided by an AFP system. (2) In MOCA, a known format of a metadata object. AFP/A. A constrained version of the general MO:DCA architecture aimed at interoperability for AFP documents in an archiving system. Refer to the ISO 18565:2015 “Document management – AFP/Archive” standard for a complete definition of AFP/A. AIAG. See Automotive Industry Action Group. AIM. See Automatic Identification Manufacturers, Inc. all points addressable (APA). The capability to address, reference, and position data elements at any addressable position in a presentation space or on a physical medium. Contrast with character cell addressable, in which the presentation space is divided into a fixed number of character-size rectangles in which characters can appear . Only the cells are addressable. An example of all points addressable is the positioning of text, graphics, and images at any addressable point on the physical medium. See also picture element. alternate exception action (AEA). In the IPDS architecture, a defined action that a printer can take when a clearly defined, but unsupported, request is received. Control over alternate exception actions is specified by an Execute Order Anystate Exception-Handling Control command. American National Standards Institute (ANSI). An organization consisting of producers, consumers, and general interest groups. ANSI establishes the procedures by which accredited organizations create and maintain voluntary industry standards in the United States. It is the United States constituent body of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). anamorphic scaling. Scaling an object differently in the vertical and horizontal directions. See also scaling, horizontal font size, and vertical font size. annotation. (1) A process by which additional data or attributes, such as highlighting, are associated with a page or a position on a page. Application of this data or attributes to the page is typically under the control of the user . Common functions such as applying adhesive removable notes to paper documents or using a transparent highlighter are emulated electronically by the annotation process. (2) A comment or explanation associated with the contents of a document component. An example of an annotation is a string of text that represents a comment on an image object on a page. annotation link. In MO:DCA, a link type that specifies the linkage from a source document component to a target document component that contains an annotation. annotation object. In MO:DCA, an object that contains an annotation. Objects that are targets of annotation links are annotation objects. ANSI. See American National Standards Institute. APA. See all points addressable. append. In MO:DCA, an addition to or continuation of the contents of a document component. An example of an append is a string of text that is an addition to an existing string of text on a page. append link. In MO:DCA, a link type that specifies the linkage from the end of a source document component to a target document component that contains an append. append object. In MO:DCA, an object that contains an append. Objects that are targets of append links are append objects. application. (1) The use to which an information system is put. (2) A collection of software components used to perform specific types of work on a computer . application program. A program written for or by a user that applies to the user's work. AFP • application program
PTOCA-C-027	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-028	Bar Code command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to present bar code symbols in a page, page segment, or overlay . bar code density . The number of characters per inch (cpi) in a bar code symbology . In most cases, the range is three to ten cpi. See also character density , density , and information density . bar code object area. The rectangular area on a logical page into which a bar code presentation space is mapped. Bar Code Object Content Architecture (BCOCA). An architected collection of constructs used to interchange and present bar code data. bar code presentation space. A two-dimensional conceptual space in which bar code symbols are generated. bar code symbol. A combination of characters including start and stop characters, quiet zones, data characters, and check characters required by a particular symbology , that form a complete, scannable entity . See also bar code. bar code symbology . A bar code language. Bar code symbologies are defined and controlled by various industry groups and standards organizations. Bar code symbologies are described in public domain bar code specification documents. Synonymous with symbology . See also Canadian Grocery Product Code (CGPC), European Article Numbering (EAN), Japanese Article Numbering (JAN), and Universal Product Code (UPC). bar height. In bar codes, the bar dimension perpendicular to the bar width. Synonymous with bar length and height. bar length. In bar codes, the bar dimension perpendicular to the bar width. Synonymous with bar height and height. bar width. In bar codes, the thickness of a bar measured from the edge closest to the symbol start character to the trailing edge of the same bar . bar width reduction. In bar codes, the reduction of the nominal bar width dimension on film masters or printing plates to compensate for systematic errors in some printing processes. base-and-towers concept. A conceptual illustration of an architecture that shows the architecture as a base with optional towers. The base and the towers represent different degrees of function achieved by the architecture. baseline. A conceptual line with respect to which successive characters are aligned. See also character baseline. Synonymous with printing baseline and sequential baseline. baseline coordinate. One of a pair of values that identify the position of an addressable position with respect to the origin of a specified I,Bcoordinate system. This value is specified as a distance in addressable positions from the I axis of an I,Bcoordinate system. Synonymous with B coordinate. baseline direction (B). The direction in which successive lines of text appear on a logical page. Synonymous with baseline progression and B direction. baseline extent. A rectangular space oriented around the character baseline and having one dimension parallel to the character baseline. The space is measured along the Y axis of the character coordinate system. For bounded character boxes, the baseline extent at any rotation is its character coordinate system Y -axis extent. Baseline extent varies with character rotation. See also maximum baseline extent. baseline increment. The distance between successive baselines. baseline offset. The perpendicular distance from the character baseline to the character box edge that is parallel to the baseline and has the more positive character coordinate system Y -axis value. For characters entirely within the negative Y -axis region, the baseline offset can be zero or negative. An example is a subscript character . Baseline offset can vary with character rotation. baseline presentation origin (B o ). The point on the B axis where the value of the baseline coordinate is zero. baseline progression (B). The direction in which successive lines of text appear on a logical page. Synonymous with baseline direction and B direction. base LND. The first Line Descriptor (LND) used to process an input line-data record. See also reuse LND. base support level. Within the base-and-towers concept, the smallest portion of architected function that is allowed to be implemented. This is represented by a base with no towers. Synonymous with mandatory support level. B axis. The axis of the I,Bcoordinate system that extends in the baseline or B direction. The B axis does not have to be parallel to the Y p axis of its bounding X p ,Y p coordinate space. B c . See current baseline presentation coordinate.
PTOCA-C-029	b c . See current baseline print coordinate.
PTOCA-C-030	BCOCA. See Bar Code Object Content Architecture. Bcoordinate. One of a pair of values that identify the position of an addressable position with respect to the origin of a specified I,Bcoordinate system. This value is specified as a distance in addressable positions from the I axis of an I,Bcoordinate system. Synonymous with baseline coordinate. Bar Code command set • Bcoordinate
PTOCA-C-031	PTOCA Reference 185 B direction (B). The direction in which successive lines of text appear on a logical page. Synonymous with baseline direction and baseline progression. Bearer Bars. Bars that surround an Interleaved 2-of-5 bar code to prevent misreads and short scans that might occur when a skewed scanning beam enters or exits the bar code symbol through its top or bottom edge. When plates are used in the printing process, Bearer Bars help equalize the pressure exerted by the printing plate over the entire surface of the symbol to improve print quality . There are two styles: 1) four bars that completely surround the bar/space pattern and 2) two bars that are placed at the top and the bottom of the bar/space pattern. Begin Segment Introducer (BSI). An IPDS graphics self-defining field that precedes all of the drawing orders in a graphics segment. between-the-pels. The concept of pel positioning that establishes the location of a pel's reference point at the edge of the pel nearest to the preceding pel rather than through the center of the pel. B extent. The extent in the B-axis direction of an I,B coordinate system. The B extent must be parallel to one of the axes of the coordinate system that contains the I,B coordinate system. The B extent is parallel to the Y p extent when the B axis is parallel to the Y p axis or to the X p extent when the B axis is parallel to the X p axis. b i . See initial baseline print coordinate.
PTOCA-C-032	big endian. A format for storage or transmission of binary data in which the most significant bit (or byte) is placed first. Contrast with little endian. bilevel. Having two levels; for example, every point in a bilevel image has the value 1 or 0, representing a colored image point or empty space. Contrast with multilevel. bilevel custom pattern. In GOCA, a custom pattern that is uncolored at definition time, then has a single color assigned to it when it is used to fill an area. Contrast with full-color custom pattern. bilevel device. A device that is used in a manner that permits it to process two-level color data. Contrast with multilevel device. BITS. A data type for architecture syntax, indicating one or more bytes to be interpreted as bit string information. blend. A mixing rule in which the intersection of part of a new presentation space P new with part of an existing presentation space P existing changes to a new color attribute that represents a color-mixing of the color attributes of P new with the color attributes of P existing . For example, if P
PTOCA-C-033	new has foreground color-attribute blue and P existing has foreground color-attribute yellow , the area where the two foregrounds intersect changes to a color attribute of green. See also mixing rule. Contrast with overpaint and underpaint. B o . See baseline presentation origin.
PTOCA-C-034	body . (1) On a printed page, the area between the top and bottom margins that can contain data. (2) In a book, the portion between the front matter and the back matter . boldface. A heavy-faced type weight. Printing in a heavy- faced type weight. boundary alignment. A method used to align image data elements by adding padding bits to each image data element. bounded character box. A conceptual rectangular box, with two sides parallel to the character baseline, that circumscribes a character and is just large enough to contain the character , that is, just touching the shape on all four sides. brightness. Attribute of a visual sensation according to which an area appears to exhibit more or less light. BSI. See Begin Segment Introducer . B space. The distance between the character coordinate system X-axis values of the two extremities of a character shape. See also A space and C space. buffered pages. Pages and copies of pages that have been received but not yet reflected in committed page counters and copy counters. BYTE. A data type for architecture syntax consisting of 8 bits and indicating that each byte has no predefined interpretation. Therefore, in CMOCA, each byte is interpreted as defined in the tag explanation. C calibration. To adjust the correct value of a reading by comparison to a standard. Canadian Grocery Product Code (CGPC). The bar code symbology used to code grocery items in Canada. cap-M height. The average height of the uppercase characters in a font. This value is specified by the designer of a font and is usually the height of the uppercase M. Cartesian coordinate system. In a plane, an image coordinate system that has positive values for the X and Y axis in the top-right quadrant. The origin is the upper left- hand corner of the bottom-right quadrant. A pair of (x,y) values corresponds to one image point. Each image point is described by an image data element. CCSID. See Coded Character Set Identifier . CGCSGID. See Coded Graphic Character Set Global Identifier . B direction (B) • CGCSGID
PTOCA-C-035	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-036	CGPC. See Canadian Grocery Product Code. CHAR. A data type for architecture syntax, indicating one or more bytes to be interpreted as character information. character . (1) A member of a set of elements used for the organization, control, or representation of data. A character can be either a graphic character or a control character . See also graphic character and control character . (2) In bar codes, a single group of bar code elements that represent an individual number , letter , punctuation mark, or other symbol. character angle. The angle that is between the baseline of a character string and the horizontal axis of a presentation space or physical medium. character attribute. A characteristic that controls the appearance of a character or character string. character baseline. A conceptual reference line that is coincident with the X axis of the character coordinate system. character box. A conceptual rectangular box with two sides parallel to the character baseline. A character's shape is formed within a character box by a presentation process, and the character box is then positioned in a presentation space or on a physical medium. The character box can be rotated before it is positioned. character-box reference edges. The four edges of a character box. character cell addressable. Allowing characters to be addressed, referenced, and positioned only in a fixed number of character-size rectangles into which a presentation space is divided. Contrast with all points addressable. character cell size. The size of a rectangle in a drawing space used to scale font symbols into the drawing space. character code. An element of a code page or a cell in a code table to which a character can be assigned. The element is associated with a binary value. The assignment of a character to an element of a code page determines the binary value that will be used to represent each occurrence of the character in a character string. character coordinate system. An orthogonal coordinate system that defines font and character measurement distances. The origin is the character reference point. The X axis coincides with the character baseline. character density . The number of characters per inch (cpi) in a bar code symbology . In most cases, the range is three to ten cpi. See also bar code density , density , and information density . character direction. In GOCA, an attribute controlling the direction in which a character string grows relative to the inline direction. Values are: left-to-right, right-to-left, top-to- bottom, and bottom-to-top. Synonymous with direction. character escapement point. The point where the next character reference point is usually positioned. See also character increment and presentation position. character identifier . The unique name for a graphic character . character increment. The distance from a character reference point to a character escapement point. For each character , the increment is the sum of a character's A space, B space, and C space. A character's character increment is the distance the inline coordinate is incremented when that character is placed in a presentation space or on a physical medium. Character increment is a property of each graphic character in a font and of the font's character rotation. character increment adjustment. In a scaled font, an adjustment to character increment values. The adjustment value is derived from the kerning track values for the font used to present the characters. character metrics. Measurement information that defines individual character values such as height, width, and space. Character metrics can be expressed in specific fixed units, such as pels, or in relative units that are independent of both the resolution and the size of the font. Often included as part of the more general term font metrics. See also character set metrics and font metrics. character origin. The point within the graphic pattern of a character that is to be aligned with the presentation position. See also character reference point. character pattern. The scan pattern for a graphic character of a particular size, style, and weight. character-pattern descriptor . Information that the printer needs to separate font raster patterns. Each character pattern descriptor is eight bytes long and specifies both the character box size and an offset value; the offset value permits the printer to find the beginning of the character raster pattern within the character raster pattern data for the complete coded font. character positioning. A method used to determine where a character is to appear in a presentation space or on a physical medium. character precision. The acceptable amount of variation in the appearance of a character on a physical medium from a specified ideal appearance, including no acceptable variation. Examples of appearance characteristics that can vary for a character are character shape and character position. character reference point. The origin of a character coordinate system. The X axis is the character baseline. See also character origin. CGPC • character reference point
PTOCA-C-037	PTOCA Reference 187 character rotation. The alignment of a character with respect to its character baseline, measured in degrees in a clockwise direction. Examples are 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270°. Zero-degree character rotation exists when a character is in its customary alignment with the baseline. Character rotation and font inline sequence are related in that character rotation is a clockwise rotation; font inline sequence is a counter-clockwise rotation. Contrast with rotation. character set. A finite set of different graphic characters or control characters that is complete for a given purpose. For example, the character set in ISO Standard 646, 7-Bit Coded Character Set for Information Processing Interchange. character set attribute. An attribute used to specify a coded font. character set metrics. The measurements used in a font. Examples are height, width, and character increment for each character of the font. See also character metrics and font metrics. character shape. The visual representation of a graphic character . character shape presentation. A method used to form a character shape on a physical medium at an addressable position. character shear . The angle of slant of a character cell that is not perpendicular to a baseline. Synonymous with shear . character string. A sequence of characters. check character . In bar codes, a character included within a bar code message whose value is used to perform a mathematical check to ensure the accuracy of that message. Synonymous with check digit. check digit. In bar codes, a character included within a bar code message whose value is used to perform a mathematical check to ensure the accuracy of that message. Synonymous with check character . CID file. A file containing the font information required for presenting the characters of a font. The shape information (glyph procedures) contained in this file is in a binary encoded format defined by Adobe Systems Inc., optimized for large character set fonts (for example, Japanese ideographic fonts having several thousand characters). CIE. See Commission Internationale d'Éclairage. CIELABcolor space. Internationally accepted color space model used as a standard to define color within the graphic arts industry , as well as other industries. L, a, and b are plotted at right angles to one another . Equal distances in the space represent approximately equal color dif ference. CIEXYZ color space. The fundamental CIE-based color space that allows colors to be expressed as a mixture of the three tristimulus values X, Y , and Z. CJK fonts. Fonts that contain a set of unified ideographic characters used in the written Chinese, Japanese, and Korean languages. The character encoding is the same for each language, but there might be glyph variants between languages. clear area. A clear space that contains no machine- readable marks preceding the start character of a bar code symbol or following the stop character . Synonymous with quiet zone. Contrast with intercharacter gap and space. clipping. Eliminating those parts of a picture that are outside of a clipping boundary such as a viewing window or presentation space. See also viewing window . Synonymous with trimming. cluster-dot screening. A halftone method that uses multiple pixels that vary from small to large dots as the color gets darker . It is characterized by a polka-dot look. CMAP file. A file containing the mapping of code points to the character index values used in a CID file. The code points conform to a particular character coding system that is used to identify the characters in a document data stream. The character index values are assigned in a CID file for identification of the glyph procedure used to define the character shape. The mapping information in this file is in an ASCII file format defined by Adobe Systems Inc. CMOCA. See Color Management Object Content Architecture. CMR. See color management resource. CMY . Cyan, magenta, and yellow , the subtractive primary colors. CMYK color space. (1) The color model used in four- color printing. Cyan, magenta, and yellow , the subtractive primary colors, are used with black to effectively create a multitude of other colors. (2) The primary colors used together in printing to effectiv ely create a multitude of other colors: cyan, magenta, yellow , and black. Based on the subtractive color theory; the primary colors used in four- color printing processes. Codabar . A bar code symbology characterized by a discrete, self-checking, numeric code with each character represented by a standalone group of four bars and the three spaces between them. CODE. A data type for architecture syntax that indicates an architected constant to be interpreted as defined by the architecture. Code 39. A bar code symbology characterized by a variable-length, bidirectional, discrete, self-checking, alphanumeric code. Three of the nine elements are wide character rotation • Code 39
PTOCA-C-038	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-039	and six are narrow . It is the standard for LOGMARS (the Department of Defense) and the AIAG. Code 128. A bar code symbology characterized by a variable-length, alphanumeric code with 128 characters. Coded Character Set Identifier (CCSID). A 16-bit number identifying a specific set consisting of an encoding scheme identifier , character set identifiers, code page identifiers, and other relevant information that uniquely identifies the coded graphic character representation used. coded font. (1) A resource containing elements of a code page and a font character set, used for presenting text, graphics character strings, and bar code HRI. See also code page and font character set. (2) In FOCA, a resource containing the resource names of a valid pair of font character set and code page resources. The graphic character set of the font character set must match the graphic character set of the code page for the coded font resource pair to be valid. (3) In the IPDS architecture, a raster font resource containing code points that are directly paired to font metrics and the raster representation of character shapes, for a specific graphic character set. (4) In the IPDS architecture, a font resource containing descriptive information, a code page, font metrics, and a digital-technology representation of character shapes for a specific graphic character set. coded font local identifier . A binary identifier that is mapped by the controlling environment to a named resource to identify a coded font. See also local identifier . coded graphic character . A graphic character that has been assigned one or more code points within a code page. coded graphic character set. A set of graphic characters with their assigned code points. Coded Graphic Character Set Global Identifier (CGCSGID). A four-byte binary or a ten-digit decimal identifier consisting of the concatenation of a GCSGID and a CPGID. The CGCSGID identifies the code point assignments in the code page for a specific graphic character set, from among all the graphic characters that are assigned in the code page. code page. (1) A resource object containing descriptive information, graphic character identifiers, and code points corresponding to a coded graphic character set. Graphic characters can be added over time; therefore, to specifically identify a code page, both a GCSGID and a CPGID should be used. See also coded graphic character set. (2) A set of assignments, each of which assigns a code point to a character . Each code page has a unique name or identifier . Within a given code page, a code point is assigned to one character . More than one character set can be assigned code points from the same code page. See also code point and section. Code Page Global Identifier (CPGID). A unique code page identifier that can be expressed as either a two-byte binary or a five-digit decimal value. code point. A unique bit pattern that can serve as an element of a code page or a site in a code table, to which a character can be assigned. The element is associated with a binary value. The assignment of a character to an element of a code page determines the binary value that will be used to represent each occurrence of the character in a character string. Code points are one or more bytes long. See also code table and section. code table. A table showing the character allocated to each code point in a code. See also code page and code point. color . A visual attribute of things that results from the light they emit, transmit, or reflect. colorants. Colors (pigments, dyes, inks) used by a device, primarily a printer , to reproduce colors. color attribute. An attribute that affects the color values provided in a graphics primitive, a text control sequence, or an IPDS command. Examples of color attributes are foreground color and background color . color calibration. The process of altering the behavior of an input or output device to make it conform to an established state, specified by a manufacturer , user , industry specification, or standard. color component. A dimension of a color value expressed as a numeric value. For example, a color value might consist of one, two, three, four , or eight components, also referred to as channels. color conversion. The process of converting colors from one color space to another . color image. Images whose image data elements are represented by multiple bits or whose image data element values are mapped to color values. Constructs that map image-data-element values to color values are look-up tables and image-data-element structure parameters. Examples of color values are screen color values for displays and color toner values for printers. colorimetric intent. A gamut mapping method that is intended to preserve the relationships between in-gamut colors at the expense of out-of-gamut colors. colorimetry . The science of measuring color and color appearance. Classical colorimetry deals primarily with color matches rather than with color appearance as such. The main focus of colorimetry has been the development of methods for predicting perceptual matches on the basis of physical measurements. color management. The technology to calibrate the color of input devices (such as scanners or digital cameras), Code 128 • color management
PTOCA-C-040	PTOCA Reference 189 display devices, and output devices (such as printers or offset presses). Color Management Object Content Architecture (CMOCA). An architected collection of constructs used for the interchange and presentation of the color management information required to render a print file, document, group of pages or sheets, page, overlay , or data object with color fidelity . color management resource. An object that provides color management in presentation environments. color management system. A set of software designed to increase the accuracy and consistency of color between color devices like a scanner , display , and printer . color model. The method by which a color is specified. For example, the RGBcolor space specifies color in terms of three intensities for red (R), green (G), and blue (B). Also referred to as color space. color of medium. The color of a presentation space before any data is added to it. Synonymous with reset color . color palette. A system of designated colors that are used in conjunction with each other to achieve visual consistency . Color Rendering Dictionary . A PostScript language construct for converting colors from the CIEXYZ color space to the device color space. It is analogous to the “from PCS” part of an ICC printer profile with one rendering intent; that is, the part used when the profile is a destination profile. color space. The method by which a color is specified. For example, the RGBcolor space specifies color in terms of three intensities for red (R), green (G), and blue (B). Also referred to as color model. ColorSpace conversion profile. An ICC profile that provides the relevant information to perform a color space transformation between the non-device color spaces and the Profile Connection Space. It does not represent any device model. ColorSpace conversion profiles can be embedded in images. color table. A collection of color element sets. The table can also specify the method used to combine the intensity levels of each element in an element set to produce a specific color . Examples of methods used to combine intensity levels are the additive method and the subtractive method. See also color model. column. A subarray consisting of all elements that have an identical position within the low dimension of a regular two-dimensional array . command. (1) In the IPDS architecture, a structured field sent from a host to a printer . (2) In GOCA, a data-stream construct used to communicate from the controlling environment to the drawing process. The command introducer is environment dependent. (3) A request for system action. command set. A collection of IPDS commands. command-set vector . Information that identifies an IPDS command set and data level supported by a printer . Command-set vectors are returned with an Acknowledge Reply to an IPDS Sense Type and Model command. Commission Internationale d'Éclairage (CIE). An association of international color scientists who produced the standards that are used as the basis of the description of color . complex text layout. The typesetting of writing systems that require complex transformations between text input and text display for proper rendering on the screen or the printed page. compression algorithm. An algorithm used to compress image data. Compression of image data can decrease the volume of data required to represent an image. construct. An architected set of data such as a structured field or a triplet. continuous code. A bar code symbology characterized by designating all spaces within the symbol as parts of characters, for example, Interleaved 2 of 5. There is no intercharacter gap in a continuous code. Contrast with discrete code. continuous-form media. Connected sheets. An example of connected sheets is sheets of paper connected by a perforated tear strip. Contrast with cut-sheet media. control character . (1) A character that denotes the start, modification, or end of a control function. A control character can be recorded for use in a subsequent action, and it can have a graphic representation. See also character . (2) A control function the coded representation of which consists of a single code point. control instruction. A data construct transmitted from the controlling environment and interpreted by the environment interface to control the operation of the graphics processor . controlled white space. White space caused by execution of a control sequence. See also white space. controlling environment. The environment in which an object is embedded, for example, the IPDS and MO:DCA data streams. control sequence. A sequence of bytes that specifies a control function. A control sequence consists of a control sequence introducer and zero or more parameters. Color Management Object Content Architecture (CMOCA) • control sequence
PTOCA-C-041	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-042	PTOCA Reference 191 current drawing attributes. The set of attributes used at the present time to direct a drawing process. Contrast with default drawing attributes. current drawing controls. The set of drawing controls used at the present time to direct a drawing process. Contrast with default drawing controls. current inline coordinate. The inline presentation position at the present time. This inline presentation position is the summation of the increments of all inline controls since the inline coordinate was established in the presentation space. An inline presentation position is established in a presentation space either as part of the initialization procedures for processing an object or by an Absolute Move Inline control sequence. Synonymous with current inline presentation coordinate. current inline presentation coordinate (I c ). The inline presentation position at the present time. This inline presentation position is the summation of the increments of all inline controls since the inline coordinate was established in the presentation space. An inline presentation position is established in a presentation space either as part of the initialization procedures for processing an object or by an Absolute Move Inline control sequence. Synonymous with current inline coordinate. current inline print coordinate (i c ). In the IPDS architecture, the inline coordinate corresponding to the current print position on a logical page. The current inline print coordinate is a coordinate in an I,Bcoordinate system. See also I,Bcoordinate system. current logical page. The logical page presentation space that is currently being used to process the data within a page object or an overlay object. current position. The position identified by the current presentation space coordinates. For example, the coordinate position reached after the execution of a drawing order . See also current baseline presentation coordinate and current inline presentation coordinate. Contrast with given position. custom line type value. A user-defined line type, defined by a series of pairs of a dash/dot length followed by a move length. Contrast with standard line type value. custom pattern. In GOCA, a user-defined pattern, defined by the picture drawn by a series of drawing orders between a Begin Custom Pattern drawing order and an End Custom Pattern drawing order . Custom patterns can be either bilevel custom patterns or full-color custom patterns. Contrast with patterns in the default pattern set. custom pattern mode. In GOCA, a mode that is entered when a Begin Custom Pattern drawing order is executed and exited when an End Custom Pattern drawing order is executed. While in this mode, drawing is done in a separate, temporary graphics presentation space rather than in the graphics presentation space of the current GOCA object. cut-sheet media. Unconnected sheets. Contrast with continuous-form media. D data block. A deprecated term for object area. data element. A unit of data that is considered indivisible. data frame. A rectangular division of computer output on microfilm. Data Map. A print control object in a Page Definition (PageDef) that establishes the page environment and specifies the mapping of line data to the page. Synonymous with Page Format. data mask. A sequence of bits that can be used to identify boundary alignment bits in image data. data object. In the IPDS architecture, a presentation-form object that is either specified within a page or overlay or is activated as a resource and later included in a page or overlay via the IDO command. Examples include: PDF single-page objects, Encapsulated PostScript objects, and IO Images. See also resource and data object resource. data-object font. (1) In the IPDS architecture, a complete-font resource that is a combination of font components at a particular size, character rotation, and encoding. A data-object font can be used in a manner analogous to a coded font. The following useful combinations can be activated into a data-object font: • A TrueType/OpenType font, an optional code page, and
PTOCA-C-043	optional linked TrueType/OpenType objects; activated at a particular size, character rotation, and encoding • A TrueType/OpenType collection, either an index value
PTOCA-C-044	or a full font name to identify the desired font within the collection, an optional code page, and optional linked TrueType/OpenType objects; activated at a particular size, character rotation, and encoding See also data-object-font component. (2) In the MO:DCA architecture, a complete non-FOCA font resource object that is analogous to a coded font. Examples of data-object fonts are TrueType fonts and OpenType fonts. data-object-font component. In the IPDS architecture, a font resource that is either printer resident or is downloaded using object container commands. Data- object-font components are used as components of a data- object font. Examples of data-object-font components include TrueType/OpenType fonts and TrueType/ OpenType collections. See also data-object font. data object resource. In the IPDS architecture, an object-container resource or IO-Image resource that is current drawing attributes • data object resource
PTOCA-C-045	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-046	either printer resident or downloaded. Data object resources can be: • Used to prepare for the presentation of a data object;
PTOCA-C-047	such as with a color management resource (CMR) or Resident Color Profile Resource • Included in a page or overlay via the Include Data Object
PTOCA-C-048	command; examples include: PDF single-page objects, Encapsulated PostScript objects, and IO Images • Invoked from within a data object; examples
PTOCA-C-049	include: PDF Resource objects and Non-OCA Resource objects See also data object and resource. data stream. A continuous stream of data that has a defined format. An example of a defined format is a structured field. data-stream exception. In the IPDS architecture, a condition that exists when the printer detects an invalid or unsupported command, order , control, or parameter value from the host. Data-stream exceptions are those whose action code is X'01', X'19', or X'1F'. See also asynchronous exception and synchronous exception. DBCS. See double-byte character set. decoder . In bar codes, the component of a bar code reading system that receives the signals from the scanner , performs the algorithm to interpret the signals into meaningful data, and provides the interface to other devices. See also reader and scanner . decryption. The process of taking encrypted data and converting it back into data that a human or a computer can read and understand. See also encryption. default. A value, attribute, or option that is assumed when none has been specified and one is needed to continue processing. See also default drawing attributes and default drawing controls. default drawing attributes. The set of drawing attributes adopted at the beginning of a drawing process and usually at the beginning of each root segment that is processed. See also root segment. Contrast with current drawing attributes. default drawing controls. The set of drawing controls adopted at the start of a drawing process and usually at the start of each root segment that is processed. See also root segment. Contrast with current drawing controls. default indicator . A field whose bits are all B'1' indicating that a hierarchical default value is to be used. The value can be specified by an external parameter . See also external parameter . default pattern set. In GOCA, a set of predefined patterns, like solid, dots, or horizontal lines. Contrast with custom pattern. density . The number of characters per inch (cpi) in a bar code symbology . In most cases, the range is three to ten cpi. See also bar code density , character density , and information density . deprecated. An architected construct is marked as “deprecated” to indicate that it should no longer be used because it has been superseded by a newer construct. Use or support of a deprecated construct is permitted but no longer recommended. Constructs are deprecated rather than immediately removed to provide backward compatibility . descender . The part of the character that extends into the character coordinate system negative Y -axis region. Examples of letters with descenders at zero-degree character rotation are g, j, p, q, y , and Q. Contrast with ascender . descender depth. The character shape's most negative character coordinate system Y -axis value. design metrics. A set of quantitative values, recommended by a font designer , to describe the characters in a font. design size. The size of the unit Em for a font. All relative font measurement values are expressed as a proportion of the design size. For example, the width of the letter Ican be specified as one-fourth of the design size. device attribute. A property or characteristic of a device. Device-Control command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to set up a page, communicate device controls, and manage printer acknowledgment protocol. device dependent. Dependent upon one or more device characteristics. An example of device dependency is a font whose characteristics are specified in terms of addressable positions of specific devices. See also system-level font resource. device independent. Not dependent upon device characteristics. device-independent color space. A CIE-based color space that allows color to be expressed in a device- independent way . It ensures colors to be predictably and accurately matched among various color devices. device level font resource. A device-specific font object from which a presentation device can obtain the font information required to present character images. device profile. A structure that provides a means of defining the color characteristics of a given device in a particular state. device resolution. The number of pels that can be printed in an inch, both horizontally and vertically . This is data stream • device resolution
PTOCA-C-050	PTOCA Reference 193 the resolution that the printer uses when printing. Some printers can be configured to print with a variety of resolutions that can be selected by the operator . The device resolution can be different in the two directions (for example, a resolution of 360 by 720). device-version code page. In the IPDS architecture, a device version of a code page contains all of the characters that were registered for the CPGID at the time the printer was developed; since then, more characters might have been added to the registry for that CPGID. A device-version code page is identified by a CPGID. See also code page. digital halftoning. A method used to simulate gray levels on a bilevel device. digital image. An image whose image data was sampled at regular intervals to produce a digital representation of the image. The digital representation is usually restricted to a specified set of values. dimension. The attribute of size given to arrays and tables. direction. In GOCA, an attribute that controls the direction in which a character string grows relative to the inline direction. Values are: left-to-right, right-to-left, top-to- bottom, and bottom-to-top. Synonymous with character direction. discrete code. A bar code symbology characterized by placing spaces that are not a part of the code between characters, that is, intercharacter gaps. dispersed-dot halftone. Any halftone algorithm that turns on binary pixels individually without grouping them into clusters. The “smallest available” dots are scattered in a pseudorandom manner to print varying densities. Commonly contrasted with cluster-dot screening. dither . An intentional form of noise added to an image to randomize quantization error . Dithering an image can prevent unwanted patterns from appearing within the image. DOCS. See drawing order coordinate space. document. (1) A machine-readable collection of one or more objects that represents a composition, a work, or a collection of data. (2) A publication or other written material. document component. An architected part of a document data stream. Examples of document components are documents, pages, page groups, indexes, resource groups, objects, and process elements. document-component hierarchy . In MO:DCA, an ordering of the document in terms of its lower-level components. The components are ordered by decreasing level as follows: • Print file (highest level)
PTOCA-C-051	• Document
PTOCA-C-052	• Page group
PTOCA-C-053	• Page • Data object (lowest level)
PTOCA-C-054	document content architecture. A family of architectures that define the syntax and semantics of the document component. See also document component and structured field. document editing. A method used to create or modify a document. document element. A self-identifying, variable-length, bounded record, that can have a content portion that provides control information, data, or both. An application or device does not have to understand control information or data to parse a data stream when all the records in the data stream are document elements. See also structured field. document fidelity . The degree to which a document presentation preserves the creator's intent. document formatting. A method used to determine where information is positioned in presentation spaces or on physical media. document presentation. A method used to produce a visible copy of formatted information on physical media. dot gain. The phenomenon that occurs when ink is transferred from the plate to the blanket of the press and finally to the paper on which it is being printed. A dot for a halftone or a screen gets larger because of the mechanical process of transferring ink. dots per inch. (1) The number of dots that will fit in an inch. (2) A unit of measure for output resolution. (3) Dots per inch (dpi) is also used to measure the quality of input when using a scanner . In this case, dpi becomes a square function measuring the dots both vertically as well as horizontally . Consequently , when an image is scanned in at 300 dpi, there are 90,000 dots or bits of electronic data
PTOCA-C-055	(300 x 300) in every square inch. double-byte character set (DBCS). A character set that can contain up to 65536 characters. double-byte coded font. A coded font in which the code points are two bytes long. downloaded resource. In the IPDS architecture, a resource in a printer that is installed and removed under control of a host presentation services program. A downloaded resource is referenced by a host-assigned name that is valid for the duration of the session between the presentation services program and the printer . Contrast with resident resource. dpi. See dots per inch. device-version code page • dpi
PTOCA-C-056	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-057	PTOCA Reference 195 files among applications in a variety of heterogeneous environments. error diffusion halftone. A specific halftone method in which quantization errors are dif fused spatially in a quasi- random manner . escapement direction. In FOCA, the direction from a character reference point to the character escapement point, that is, the font designer's intended direction for successive character shapes. See also character direction and inline direction. escape sequence. (1) In the IPDS architecture, the first two bytes of a control sequence. An example of an escape sequence is X'2BD3'. (2) A string of bit combinations that is used for control in code extension procedures. The first of these bit combinations represents the control function Escape. ESID. See Encoding Scheme Identifier . established baseline coordinate. The current baseline presentation coordinate when no temporary baseline exists or the last current baseline presentation coordinate that existed before the first active temporary baseline was created. If temporary baselines are created, the current baseline presentation coordinate coincides with the presentation coordinate of the most recently created temporary baseline. European Article Numbering (EAN). The bar code symbology used to code grocery items in Europe. exception. (1) An invalid or unsupported data-stream construct. (2) In the IPDS architecture, a condition requiring host notification. (3) In the IPDS architecture, a condition that requires the host to resend data. See also data-stream exception, asynchronous exception, and synchronous exception. exception action. Action taken when an exception is detected. exception condition. The condition that exists when a product finds an invalid or unsupported construct. exchange. The predictable interpretation of shared information by a family of system processes in an environment where the characteristics of each process must be known to all other processes. Contrast with interchange. EXI. See Efficient XML Interchange. expanded. A type width that widens all characters of a typeface. Extended Binary-Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC). A coded character set that consists of eight-bit coded characters. Extensible Markup Language (XML). A set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human- readable and machine-readable. Extensible Metadata Platform (XMP). An ISO standard, originally created by Adobe Systems Incorporated, for the creation, processing, and interchange of standardized and custom metadata for all kinds of resources. external leading. The amount of white space, in addition to the internal leading, that can be added to interline spacing without degrading the aesthetic appearance of a font. This value is usually specified by a font designer . Contrast with internal leading. external parameter . A parameter for which the current value can be provided by the controlling environment, for example, the data stream, or by the application itself. Contrast with internal parameter . F factoring. The movement of a parameter value from one state to a higher-level state. This permits the parameter value to apply to all of the lower-level states unless specifically overridden at the lower level. FGID. See Font Typeface Global Identifier . filename map file. A file containing the mapping of object names to file names for use in establishing a font file system. Object names and file names do not conform to the same naming requirements, so it is necessary to provide a mapping between them. The mapping information in this file is in an ASCII file format defined by Adobe Systems Inc. fillet. A curved line drawn tangential to a specified set of straight lines. An example of a fillet is the concave junction formed where two lines meet. final form data. Data that has been formatted for presentation. first read rate. In bar codes, the ratio of the number of successful reads on the first attempt to the total number of attempts made to obtain a successful read. Synonymous with read rate. fixed medium information. Information that can be applied to a sheet by a printer or printer-attached device that is independent of data provided through the data stream. Fixed medium information does not mix with the data provided by the data stream and is presented on a sheet either before or after the text, image, graphics, or bar code data provided within the data stream. Fixed medium information can be used to create preprinted forms, or other types of printing, such as colored logos or letterheads, that cannot be created conveniently within the data stream. error diffusion halftone • fixed medium information
PTOCA-C-058	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-059	fixed metrics. Graphic character measurements in physical units such as pels, inches, or centimeters. FNN linked. In FOCA, the FNN (Font Name map) structured field permits the mapping of a set of IBM GCGIDs to the character index values that occur in either a CMAP file or a rearranged file. Because the set of GCGIDs and the set of character index values must correspond to the same set of characters, it is necessary to identify which CMAP or rearranged file (among the many that could be located in a font file system) is associated (linked) with the FNN structured field. Note that the Font Name Map is known as the Character ID Map in IPDS. FOCA. See Font Object Content Architecture. font. A set of graphic characters that have a characteristic design, or a font designer's concept of how the graphic characters should appear . The characteristic design specifies the characteristics of its graphic characters. Examples of characteristics are character shape, graphic pattern, style, size, weight class, and increment. Examples of fonts are fully described fonts, symbol sets, and their internal printer representations. See also coded font and symbol set. font baseline extent. In the IPDS architecture, the sum of the uniform or maximum baseline offset and the maximum baseline descender of all characters in the font. font character set. A FOCA resource containing descriptive information, font metrics, and the digital representation of character shapes for a specified graphic character set. font control record. The record sent in an IPDS Load Font Control command to specify a font ID and other font parameters that apply to the complete font. font height (FH). (1) A characteristic value, perpendicular to the character baseline, that represents the size of all graphic characters in a font. Synonymous with vertical font size. (2) In a font character set, nominal font height is a font-designer defined value corresponding to the nominal distance between adjacent baselines when character rotation is zero degrees and no external leading is used. This distance represents the baseline-to-baseline increment that includes the font's maximum baseline extent and the designer's recommendation for internal leading. The font designer can also define a minimum and a maximum vertical font size to represent the limits of scaling. (3) In font referencing, the specified font height is the desired size of the font when the characters are presented. If this size is different from the nominal vertical font size specified in a font character set, the character shapes and character metrics might need to be scaled prior to presentation. font index. (1) The mapping of a descriptive font name to a font member name in a font library . An example of a font member in a font library is a font resource object. Examples of attributes used to form a descriptive font name are typeface, family name, point size, style, weight class, and width class. (2) In the IPDS architecture, an LF1-type raster-font resource containing character metrics for each code point of a raster font or raster-font section for a particular font inline sequence. There can be a font index for 0 degree, 90 degree, 180 degree, and 270 degree font inline sequences. A font index can be downloaded to a printer using the Load Font Index command. An LF1-type coded font or coded-font section is the combination of one fully described font and one font index. See also fully described font. font inline sequence. The clockwise rotation of the inline direction relative to a character pattern. Character rotation and font inline sequence are related in that character rotation is a clockwise rotation; font inline sequence is a counter-clockwise rotation. font local identifier . A binary identifier that is mapped by the controlling environment to a named resource to identify a font. See also local identifier . font metrics. Measurement information that defines individual character values such as height, width, and space, as well as overall font values such as averages and maximums. Font metrics can be expressed in specific fixed units, such as pels, or in relative units that are independent of both the resolution and the size of the font. See also character metrics and character set metrics. font modification parameters. Parameters that alter the appearance of a typeface. font object. A resource object that contains some or all of the description of a font. Font Object Content Architecture (FOCA). An architected collection of constructs used to describe fonts and to interchange those font descriptions. font production. A method used to create a font. This method includes designing each character image, converting the character images to a digital-technology format, defining parameter values for each character , assigning appropriate descriptive and identifying information, and creating a font resource that contains the required information in a format that can be used by a text processing system. Digital-technology formats include bit image, vector drawing orders, and outline algorithms. Parameter values include such attributes as height, width, and escapement. font referencing. A method used to identify or characterize a font. Examples of processes that use font referencing are document editing, document formatting, and document presentation. Font Typeface Global Identifier (FGID). A unique font identifier that can be expressed as either a two-byte binary or a five-digit decimal value. The FGID is used to identify a type style and the following characteristics: posture, weight class, and width class. fixed metrics • Font Typeface Global Identifier (FGID)
PTOCA-C-060	PTOCA Reference 197 font width (FW). (1) A characteristic value, parallel to the character baseline, that represents the size of all graphic characters in a font. Synonymous with horizontal font size. (2) In a font character set, nominal font width is a font-designer defined value corresponding to the nominal character increment for a font character set. The value is generally the width of the space character and is defined differently for fonts with different spacing characteristics. • For fixed-pitch, uniform character increment fonts: the
PTOCA-C-061	fixed character increment, that is also the space character increment • For PSM fonts: the width of the space character
PTOCA-C-062	• For typographic, proportionally spaced fonts: one-third of
PTOCA-C-063	the vertical font size, that is also the default size of the space character . The font designer can also define a minimum and a maximum horizontal font size to represent the limits of scaling. (3) In font referencing, the specified font width is the desired size of the font when the characters are presented. If this size is different from the nominal horizontal font size specified in a font character set, the character shapes and character metrics might need to be scaled prior to presentation. foreground. (1) The part of a presentation space that is occupied by object data. (2) In GOCA, the portion of a graphics primitive that is mixed into the presentation space under the control of the current value of the mix and color attributes. See also pel. Contrast with background. foreground color . A color attribute used to specify the color of the foreground of a primitive. Contrast with background color . foreground mix. An attribute used to determine how the foreground color of data is combined with the existing color of a graphics presentation space. An example of data is a graphics primitive. Contrast with background mix. form. A division of the physical medium; multiple forms can exist on a physical medium. For example, a roll of paper might be divided by a printer into rectangular pieces of paper , each representing a form. Envelopes are an example of a physical medium that comprises only one form. The IPDS architecture defines four types of forms: cut-sheet media, continuous-form media, envelopes, and computer output on microfilm. Each type of form has a top edge. A form has two sides, a front side and a back side. Synonymous with sheet. format. The arrangement or layout of data on a physical medium or in a presentation space. formatter . A process used to prepare a document for presentation. formblend. (1) In IPDS, this mixing rule is only used when a preprinted form overlay (PFO) is merged as presentation space P PFO with other presentation data (presentation space P data ). The intersection of P PFO and P data is assigned the following color attribute: • Wherever the color attribute of P
PTOCA-C-064	PFO is either color of medium, or “white” (CMYK = X'00000000' for a printer , RGB = X'FFFFFF' for an RGB display), the intersection is assigned the color attribute of P data . Likewise,
PTOCA-C-065	wherever the color attribute of P data is either color of medium, or “white” (CMYK = X'00000000' for a printer , RGB = X'FFFFFF' for an RGB display), the intersection is assigned the color attribute of P PFO . • With other overlapping color values, the intersection
PTOCA-C-066	assumes a new color attribute that is generated in a device-specific manner to simulate how the P data color attribute would mix onto a preprinted form that has the color attribute of P PFO . In general, this mixing is a
PTOCA-C-067	blending of the color attributes of P data and P PFO that is determined by the two color attributes and by the print media and the print technology . See also mixing rule. (2) In MO:DCA, this mixing rule is only used when a simulated preprinted form, which is simulated as either a Medium Preprinted Form overlay (M- PFO) or a PMC Preprinted Form overlay (PMC-PFO), is merged as a new presentation space P n , onto an existing presentation space P e . The intersection of the foregrounds
PTOCA-C-068	of P n and P e is assigned the following color attribute: • Wherever the color attribute of P
PTOCA-C-069	e is either the color of medium, or the color white (CMYK = X'00000000' or RGB = X'FFFFFF'), the intersection is assigned the color attribute of P n . • Wherever the color attribute of P
PTOCA-C-070	e is not the color of medium and not the color white, the intersection assumes a new color attribute that is generated in a device-specific manner to simulate how the P e color attribute would mix onto a preprinted form that has the color attribute of P n . In general, this mixing is a blending
PTOCA-C-071	of the color attributes of P n and P e that is determined by the two color attributes and by the print media and the print technology . Formdef. See Form Definition. Form Definition (Formdef). A print control object that contains an environment definition and one or more Medium Maps. Synonymous with Form map. Form Map. A print control object that contains an environment definition and one or more Medium Maps. Synonymous with Form Definition. See also Medium Map. full arc. A complete circle or ellipse. See also arc. full-color custom pattern. In GOCA, a custom pattern that has its colors completely assigned during its definition, and can therefore contain any number of colors. Contrast with bilevel custom pattern. fully described font. In the IPDS architecture, an LF1- type raster-font resource containing font metrics, descriptive information, and the raster representation of character shapes, for a specific graphic character set. A fully described font can be downloaded to a printer using the Load Font Control and Load Font commands. An LF1- type coded font or coded-font section is the combination of font width (FW) • fully described font
PTOCA-C-072	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-073	one fully described font and one font index. See also font index. function set. (1) A collection of architecture constructs and associated values. Function sets can be defined across or within subsets. (2) In the MO:DCA architecture, a formal extension to a MO:DCA interchange set that provides additional capabilities beyond those provided by the interchange set. FW . See font width. G gamma. A measure of contrast in photographic images. More precisely , a parameter that describes the shape of the transfer function for one or more stages in an imaging pipeline. The transfer function is given by the expression output = input gamma where both input and output are scaled to the range 0 to 1. gamut. In color reproduction, the subset of colors that can be accurately represented in a given circumstance, such as within a given color space or by a certain output device. GCGID. See Graphic Character Global Identifier . GCSGID. See Graphic Character Set Global Identifier . GCUID. See Graphic Character UCS Identifier . generic. Relating to, or characteristic of, a whole group or class. GID. See global identifier . GIF . See Graphic Interchange Format. given position. The coordinate position at which drawing is to begin. A given position is specified in a drawing order . Contrast with current position. GLC chain. The set of glyph layout control sequences used to present a set of glyphs. It consists of a GLC control sequence followed by one or more GIR/GAR/GOR control sequence groupings, wherein the GOR is always optional. These control sequences must be chained together using PTOCA chaining rules. No other control sequences can be interspersed within the GIR/GAR/GOR groupings or between the groupings. The GLC chain may be terminated by an optional UCT control sequence that carries the code points of the glyphs rendered by the GLC chain. Global Identifier (GID). Any of the following: • Coded Character Set Identifier (CCSID)
PTOCA-C-074	• Coded Graphic Character Set Global Identifier
PTOCA-C-075	(CGCSGID) • Code Page Global ID (CPGID)
PTOCA-C-076	• Font Typeface Global Identifier (FGID)
PTOCA-C-077	• Global Resource Identifier (GRID)
PTOCA-C-078	• Graphic Character Global Identifier (GCGID)
PTOCA-C-079	• Graphic Character Set Global Identifier (GCSGID)
PTOCA-C-080	• Graphic Character UCS Identifier (GCUID)
PTOCA-C-081	• An identifier used by a data object to reference a
PTOCA-C-082	resource • In MO:DCA, an encoded graphic character string that
PTOCA-C-083	provides a reference name for a document element • Object identifier (OID)
PTOCA-C-084	• A Uniform Resource Locator (URL), as defined in RFC
PTOCA-C-085	1738, Internet Engineering T ask Force (IETF), December , 1994. Global Resource Identifier (GRID). An eight-byte identifier that identifies a coded font resource. A GRID contains the following fields in the order shown: 1. GCSGID of a minimum set of graphic characters
PTOCA-C-086	required for presentation; it can be a character set that is associated with the code page, or with the font character set, or with both 2. CPGID of the associated code page
PTOCA-C-087	FGID of the associated font character set
PTOCA-C-088	Font width in 1440ths of an inch.
PTOCA-C-089	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-090	guard bars. The bars at both ends and the center of an EAN, JAN, or UPC symbol, that provide reference points for scanning. gzip. A widely-used, free software compression algorithm. H HAID. See Host-Assigned ID. halftone. A method of generating, on a press or laser printer , an image that requires varying densities or shades to accurately render the image. This is achieved by representing the image as a pattern of dots of varying size. Larger dots represent darker areas, and smaller dots represent lighter areas of an image. hard object. An object that is mapped with a Map structured field in the environment group of a Form Map, page, or overlay , that causes the server to retrieve the object and send it to the presentation device. The object is then referenced for inclusion at a later time. Contrast with soft object. height. In bar codes, the bar dimension perpendicular to the bar width. Synonymous with bar height and bar length. hexadecimal. A number system with a base of sixteen. The decimal digits 0 through 9 and characters A through F are used to represent hexadecimal digits. The hexadecimal digits A through F correspond to the decimal numbers 10 through 15, respectively . An example of a hexadecimal number is X'1B', that is equal to the decimal number 27. hierarchy . A series of elements that have been graded or ranked in some useful manner . highlight color . A spot color that is used to accentuate or contrast monochromatic areas. See also spot color . highlighting. The emphasis of displayed or printed information. Examples are increased intensity of selected characters on a display screen and exception highlighting on an IPDS printer . hollow font. A font design in which the graphic character shapes include only the outer edges of the strokes. home state. An initial IPDS operating state. A printer returns to home state at the end of each page, and after downloading a font, overlay , or page segment. horizontal bar code. A bar code pattern presenting the axis of the symbol in its length dimension parallel to the X bc axis of the bar code presentation space. Synonymous with picket fence bar code. horizontal font size. (1) A characteristic value, parallel to the character baseline, that represents the size of all graphic characters in a font. Synonymous with font width. (2) In a font character set, nominal horizontal font size is a font-designer defined value corresponding to the nominal character increment for a font character set. The value is generally the width of the space character and is defined differently for fonts with different spacing characteristics. • For fixed-pitch, uniform character increment fonts: the
PTOCA-C-091	fixed character increment, that is also the space character increment • For PSM fonts: the width of the space character
PTOCA-C-092	• For typographic fonts and proportionally spaced fonts:
PTOCA-C-093	one-third of the vertical font size, that is also the default size of the space character . The font designer can also define a minimum and a maximum horizontal font size to represent the limits of scaling. (3) In font referencing, the specified horizontal font size is the desired size of the font when the characters are presented. If this size is different from the nominal horizontal font size specified in a font character set, the character shapes and character metrics might need to be scaled prior to presentation. horizontal scale factor . (1) In outline-font referencing, the specified horizontal adjustment of the Em square. The horizontal scale factor is specified in 1440ths of an inch. When the horizontal and vertical scale factors are different, anamorphic scaling occurs. See also vertical scale factor . (2) In FOCA, the numerator of a scaling ratio, determined by dividing the horizontal scale factor by the vertical font size. If the value specified is greater or less than the specified vertical font size, the graphic characters and their corresponding metric values are stretched or compressed in the horizontal direction relative to the vertical direction by the scaling ratio indicated. host. (1) In the IPDS architecture, a computer that drives a printer . (2) In IOCA, the host is the controlling environment. Host-Assigned ID (HAID). A two-byte ID in the range X'0001'–X'7EFF' that is assigned to an IPDS resource by a presentation-services program in the host. This ID uniquely identifies a resource until that resource is deactivated, in which case the HAID can be reused. HAIDs are used in IPDS resource management commands. Host-Assigned Resource ID. The combination of a Host-Assigned ID with a section identifier , or a font inline sequence, or both. The section identifier and font inline sequence values are ignored for both page segments and overlays. See also section identifier and font inline sequence. HRI. See human-readable interpretation. HSV color space. (1) A transformation of the RGBcolor space that allow colors to be described in terms more natural to an artist. The name HSV stands for hue, saturation, and value. (2) Abbreviation for hue, saturation, and value (a color model used in some graphics programs). HSV must be translated to another model for color printing or for forming screen colors. guard bars • HSV color space
PTOCA-C-094	PTOCA Reference 201 human-readable interpretation (HRI). The printed translation of bar code characters into equivalent Latin alphabetic characters, Arabic numeral decimal digits, and common special characters normally used for printed human communication. hypermedia. Interlinked pieces of information consisting of a variety of data types such as text, graphics data, image, audio, and video. hypertext. Interlinked pieces of information consisting primarily of text. I +I. Positive inline direction. I. See inline direction. I axis. The axis of an I,Bcoordinate system that extends in the inline direction. The I axis does not have to be parallel to the X p axis of its bounding X p ,Y p coordinate space. I,Bcoordinate system. The coordinate system used to present graphic characters. This coordinate system is used to establish the inline direction and baseline direction for the placement of successive graphic characters within a presentation space. See also X p ,Y p coordinate system. I c . See current inline presentation coordinate.
PTOCA-C-095	i c . See current inline print coordinate.
PTOCA-C-096	ICC. See International Color Consortium. ICC-absolute colorimetric. A rendering intent in which the chromatically adapted tristimulus values of the in- gamut colors are unchanged. It is useful for spot colors and when simulating one medium on another (proofing). Note that this definition of ICC-absolute colorimetry is actually called “relative colorimetry” in CIE terminology , since the data has been normalized relative to the perfect dif fuser viewed under the same illumination source as the sample. ICC DeviceLink profile. An ICC profile that provides a mechanism in which to save and store a series of device profiles and non-device profiles in a concatenated format as long as the series begins and ends with a device profile. This is useful for workflows where a combination of device profiles and non-device profiles are used repeatedly . ICC profile. A file in the International Color Consortium profile format, containing information about the color reproduction capabilities of a device such as a scanner , a digital camera, a monitor , or a printer . An ICC profile includes three elements: 128-byte file header , tag table, and tagged element data. The intent of this format is to provide a cross-platform device profile format. Such device profiles can be used to translate color data created on one device into another device's native color space. ID. Identifier . See also Host-Assigned ID (HAID), correlation ID, font control record, and overlay ID. IDE. See image data element. I direction. (1) The direction in which successive characters appear in a line of text. (2) In GOCA, the direction specified by the character angle attribute. Synonymous with inline direction. IDP . See image data parameter . IEEE. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. I extent. The X p extent when the I axis is parallel to the X p axis or the Y p extent when the I axis is parallel to the Y p axis. The definition of the I extent depends on the X p or Y p extent because the I,Bcoordinate system is contained within an X p ,Y p coordinate system. i i . See initial inline print coordinate.
PTOCA-C-097	illuminant. Something that can serve as a source of light. image. An electronic representation of a picture produced by means of sensing light, sound, electron radiation, or other emanations coming from the picture or reflected by the picture. An image can also be generated directly by software without reference to an existing picture. image block. A deprecated term for image object area. image content. Image data and its associated image data parameters. image coordinate system. An X,Y Cartesian coordinate system using only the fourth quadrant with positive values for the Y axis. The origin of an image coordinate system is its upper left hand corner . An X,Y coordinate specifies a presentation position that corresponds to one and only one image data element in the image content. image data. Rectangular arrays of raster information that define an image. image data element (IDE). A basic unit of image information. An image data element expresses the intensity of a signal at a corresponding image point. An image data element can use a look-up table to introduce a level of indirection into the expression of grayscale image or color image. image data parameter (IDP). A parameter that describes characteristics of image data. image distortion. Deformation of an image such that the original proportions of the image are changed and the original balance and symmetry of the image are lost. image object. An object that contains image data. See also object. human-readable interpretation (HRI) • image object
PTOCA-C-098	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-099	image object area. A rectangular area on a logical page into which an image presentation space is mapped. Image Object Content Architecture (IOCA). An architected collection of constructs used to interchange and present images. image point. A discrete X,Y coordinate in the image presentation space. See also addressable position. image presentation space (IPS). A two-dimensional conceptual space in which an image is generated. image segment. Image content bracketed by Begin Segment and End Segment self-defining fields. See also segment. IM Image. A migration image object that is resolution dependent, bi level, and cannot be compressed or scaled. Contrast with IO Image. IM-Image command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to present IM-Image data in a page, page segment, or overlay . immediate mode. The mode in which segments are executed as they are received and then discarded. Contrast with store mode. indexed color . A color image format that contains a palette of colors to define the image. Indexed color can reduce file size while maintaining visual quality . indexed object. An object in a MO:DCA document that is referenced by an Index Element structured field in a MO:DCA index. Examples of indexed objects are pages and page groups. information density . The number of characters per inch (cpi) in a bar code symbology . In most cases, the range is three to ten cpi. See also bar code density , character density , and density . initial addressable position. The values assigned to I c and B c by the data stream at the start of object state. The standard action values are I o and B o . initial baseline print coordinate (b i ). The baseline coordinate of the first print position on a logical page. See also initial inline print coordinate. initial inline print coordinate (i i ). The inline coordinate of the first print position on a logical page. See also initial baseline print coordinate. inline-baseline coordinate system. See I,Bcoordinate system. inline coordinate. The first of a pair of values that identifies the position of an addressable position with respect to the origin of a specified I,Bcoordinate system. This value is specified as a distance in addressable positions from the B axis of an I,Bcoordinate system. inline direction (I). (1) The direction in which successive characters appear in a line of text. (2) In GOCA, the direction specified by the character angle attribute. Synonymous with I direction. inline margin. The inline coordinate that identifies the initial addressable position for a line of text. inline presentation origin (I o ). The point on the I axis where the value of the inline coordinate is zero. inline resource. A resource object carried in a resource group that precedes all documents in an AFP print file. input profile. An ICC profile that is associated with the image and describes the characteristics of the device on which the image was created. instruction CMR. A color management resource that identifies processing that is to be done to an object. Intelligent Printer Data Stream (IPDS). An architected host-to-printer data stream that contains both data and controls defining how the data is to be presented. intensity . The extreme strength, degree, or amount of ink. interchange. The predictable interpretation of shared information in an environment where the characteristics of each process need not be known to all other processes. Contrast with exchange. interchange set. A defined set of MO:DCA function that describes a level of interchange. intercharacter adjustment. Additional distance applied to a character increment that increases or decreases the distance between presentation positions, effectively modifying the amount of white space between graphic characters. The amount of white space between graphic characters is changed to spread the characters of a word for emphasis, distribute excess white space on a line among the words of that line to achieve right justification, or move the characters on the line closer together as in kerning. Examples of intercharacter adjustment are intercharacter increment and intercharacter decrement. intercharacter decrement. Intercharacter adjustment applied in the negative I direction from the current presentation position. See also intercharacter adjustment. intercharacter gap. In bar codes, the space between two adjacent bar code characters in a discrete code, for example, the space between two characters in Code 39. Synonymous with intercharacter space. Contrast with clear area, element, and space. image object area • intercharacter gap
PTOCA-C-100	PTOCA Reference 203 intercharacter increment. Intercharacter adjustment applied in the positive I direction from the current presentation position. See also intercharacter adjustment. intercharacter space. In bar codes, the space between two adjacent bar code characters in a discrete code, for example, the space between two characters in Code 39. Synonymous with intercharacter gap. Contrast with element and space. interleaved bar code. A bar code symbology in which characters are paired, using bars to represent the first character and spaces to represent the second. An example is Interleaved 2 of 5. intermediate device. In the IPDS architecture, a device that operates on the data stream and is situated between a printer and a presentation services program in the host. Examples include devices that capture and cache resources and devices that spool the data stream. internal leading. A font design parameter referring to the space provided between lines of type to keep ascenders separated from descenders and to provide an aesthetically pleasing interline spacing. The value of this parameter usually equals the dif ference between the vertical font size and the font baseline extent. Contrast with external leading. internal parameter . In PTOCA, a parameter whose current value is contained within the object. Contrast with external parameter . International Color Consortium (ICC). A group of companies chartered to develop, use, and promote cross- platform standards so that applications and devices can exchange color data without ambiguity . International Organization for Standardization (ISO). An organization of national standards bodies from various countries established to promote development of standards to facilitate international exchange of goods and services, and develop cooperation in intellectual, scientific, technological, and economic activity . interoperability . The capability to communicate, execute programs, or transfer data among various functional units in a way that requires the user to have little or no knowledge of the unique characteristics of those units. introducer . In GOCA, that part of the data stream passed from a controlling environment to a communication processor that indicates whether entities are to be processed in immediate mode or store mode. See also immediate mode and store mode. I o . See inline presentation origin.
PTOCA-C-101	IOCA. See Image Object Content Architecture. IO Image. An image object containing IOCA constructs. Contrast with IM Image. IO-Image command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to present IOCA data in a page, page segment, or overlay . IPDS. See Intelligent Printer Data Stream. IPDS dialog. A series of IPDS commands and IPDS Acknowledge Replies. An IPDS dialog begins with the first IPDS command that an IPDS device receives and ends either when an IPDS command explicitly ends the dialog or when the carrying-protocol session ends. There can be multiple independent sessions each with an IPDS dialog. See also session. IPS. See image presentation space. ISO. See International Organization for Standardization. italics. A typeface with characters that slant upward to the right. In FOCA, italics is the common name for the defined inclined typeface posture attribute or parameter . J JAN. See Japanese Article Numbering. Japanese Article Numbering (JAN). The bar code symbology used to code grocery items in Japan. JFIF. See JPEG File Interchange Format. jog. To cause printed sheets to be stacked in an output stacker offset from previously stacked sheets. Jogging is requested by using an IPDS Execute Order Anystate Alternate Offset Stacker command. Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG). The Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) is a standards committee that designed an image compression format. The compression format they designed is lossy , in that it deletes information from an image that it considers unnecessary . JPEG files can range from small amounts of lossless compression to large amounts of lossy compression. JPEG. An image compression standard. See Joint Photographic Experts Group. JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF). (1) JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF) is the most common file format for JPEG images. (TIFF is another file format that can be used to store JPEG images, and JNG is a third.) JFIF is not a formal standard; it was designed by a group of companies (though it is most often associated with C-Cube Microsystems, one of whose employees published it) and became a de facto industry standard. (2) Three- component JPEG images. RGB data is assumed without intercharacter increment • JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF)
PTOCA-C-102	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-103	gamma correction and the APP0 marker is used to specify the resolution and optionally the thumbnail. K Kanji. A graphic character set for symbols used in Japanese ideographic alphabets. kerning. The design of graphic characters so that their character boxes overlap, resulting in the reduction of space between characters. This allows characters to be designed for cursive languages, ligatures, and proportionally spaced fonts. An example of kerning is the printing of adjacent graphic characters so they overlap on the left or right side. kerning track. A straight-line graph that associates vertical font size with white space adjustment. The result of this association is used to scale fonts. kerning track intercept. The X-intercept of a kerning track for a given vertical font size or white space adjustment value. kerning track slope. The slope of a kerning track. key information. Bytes used by the decryption system to decrypt data that has been encrypted. keyword. A two-part self-defining parameter consisting of a one-byte identifier and a one-byte value. L ladder bar code. A bar code pattern presenting the axis of the symbol in its length dimension parallel to the Y bc axis of the bar code presentation space. Synonymous with vertical bar code. LAN. See local area network. landscape. A presentation orientation in which the X m axis is parallel to the long sides of a rectangular physical medium. Contrast with portrait. language. A set of symbols, conventions, and rules that is used for conveying information. See also pragmatics, semantics, and syntax. LCID. See Local Character Set Identifier . leading. A printer's term for the amount of space between lines of a printed page. Leading refers to the lead slug placed between lines of type in traditional typesetting. See also internal leading and external leading. leading edge. (1) The edge of a character box that in the inline direction precedes the graphic character . (2) The front edge of a sheet as it moves through a printer . legibility . Characteristics of presented characters that affect how rapidly , easily , and accurately one character can be distinguished from another . The greater the speed, ease, and accuracy of perception, the more legible the presented characters. Examples of characteristics that affect legibility are character shape, spacing, and composition. LID. See local identifier . ligature. A single glyph representing two or more characters. Examples of characters that can be presented as ligatures are ff and ffi. linear gradient. In GOCA, a gradient where the color change takes place along a line. Contrast with radial gradient. line art. An image that contains only black and white with no shades of gray . line attributes. Those attributes that pertain to straight and curved lines. Examples of line attributes are line type and line width. line data. Unformatted text data. Line data can be formatted using a Page Definition (PageDef). line screen frequency . The measure of distance between the rows of dots that make up a halftone screen. Lower line screens are used on rougher , low quality printing substrates (such as newsprint), while higher line screens are used for high quality print jobs on smooth art papers. lines per inch (lpi). (1) The number of lines per inch on a halftone screen. (2) Units used when measuring line screen frequency . line type. A line attribute that controls the appearance of a line. The line type can either be a standard line type value or a custom line type value. Contrast with line width. line width. A line attribute that controls the appearance of a line. Examples of line width are normal and thick. Contrast with line type. link. A logical connection from a source document component to a target document component. little endian. A bit or byte ordering where the right-most bits or bytes (those with a higher address) are most significant. Contrast with big endian. Loaded-Font command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to load font information into a printer and to deactivate font resources. local area network (LAN). A data network located on a user's premises in which serial transmission is used for direct data communication among data stations. Kanji • local area network (LAN)
PTOCA-C-104	PTOCA Reference 205 Local Character Set Identifier (LCID). A local identifier used as a character , marker , or pattern set attribute. local identifier (LID). An identifier that is mapped by the controlling environment to a named resource. location. A site within a data stream. A location is specified in terms of an offset in the number of structured fields from the beginning of a data stream, or in the number of bytes from another location within the data stream. logical page. A presentation space. One or more object areas can be mapped to a logical page. A logical page has specifiable characteristics, such as size, shape, orientation, and offset. The shape of a logical page is the shape of a rectangle. Orientation and offset are specified relative to a medium coordinate system. logical unit. A unit of linear measurement expressed with a unit base and units per unit-base value. For example, in MO:DCA and IPDS architectures, the following logical units are used: • 1 logical unit = 1/1440 inch
PTOCA-C-105	(unit base = 10 inches, units per unit base = 14,400) • 1 logical unit = 1/240 inch
PTOCA-C-106	(unit base = 10 inches, units per unit base = 2400) Synonymous with L unit. look-up table (LUT). (1) A table used to map one or more input values to one or more output values. (2) A logical list of colors or intensities. The list has a name and can be referenced to select a color or intensity . See also color table. lossless. A form of image transformation in which all of the data is retained. Contrast with lossy . lossy . A form of image transformation in which some of the data is lost. Contrast with lossless. lowercase. Pertaining to small letters as distinguished from capital letters. Examples of small letters are a, b, and g. Contrast with uppercase. lpi. See lines per inch. L unit. A unit of linear measurement expressed with a unit base and units per unit-base value. For example, in MO:DCA and IPDS architectures, the following L units are used: • 1 L unit = 1/1440 inch
PTOCA-C-107	(unit base = 10 inches, units per unit base = 14,400) • 1 L unit = 1/240 inch
PTOCA-C-108	(unit base = 10 inches, units per unit base = 2400) Synonymous with logical unit. LUT . See look-up table. Luv color space. The CIE color space in which L, u and v are plotted at right angles to one another . Equal distances in the space represent approximately equal color dif ference. M magnetic ink character recognition (MICR). Recognition of characters printed with ink that contains particles of a magnetic material. mainframe interactive (MFI). Pertaining to systems in which nonprogrammable terminals are connected to a mainframe. mandatory support level. Within the base-and-towers concept, the smallest portion of architected function that is allowed to be implemented. This is represented by a base with no towers. Synonymous with base support level. marker . A symbol with a recognizable appearance that is used to identify a particular location. An example of a marker is a symbol that is positioned by the center point of its cell. marker attributes. The characteristics that control the appearance of a marker . Examples of marker attributes are size and color . marker cell. A conceptual rectangular box that can include a marker symbol and the space surrounding that symbol. marker precision. A method used to specify the degree of influence that marker attributes have on the appearance of a marker; this method has been made obsolete. marker set. In GOCA, an attribute used to access a coded font. marker symbol. A symbol that is used for a marker . maximum ascender height. The maximum of the individual character ascender heights. A value for maximum ascender height is specified for each supported character rotation. Contrast with maximum descender depth. maximum baseline extent. In FOCA, the sum of the maximum of the individual character baseline offsets and the maximum of the individual character descender depths, for a given font. maximum descender depth. The maximum of the individual character descender depths. A value for maximum descender depth is specified for each supported character rotation. Contrast with maximum ascender height. Local Character Set Identifier (LCID) • maximum descender depth
PTOCA-C-109	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-110	meaning. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading convey the meaning or purpose of a construct. A meaning entry can be a long name, a description, or a brief statement of function. measurement base. A base unit of measure from which other units of measure are derived. media. Plural of medium. See also medium. media destination. The destination to which sheets are sent as the last step in the print process. Some printers support several media destinations to allow options such as print job distribution to one or more specific destinations, collated copies without having to resend the document to the printer multiple times, and routing output to a specific destination for security reasons. Contrast with media source. media-relative colorimetric. This rendering intent rescales the in-gamut, chromatically-adapted tristimulus values such that the white point of the actual medium is mapped to the PCS white point (for either input or output). It is useful for colors that have already been mapped to a medium with a smaller gamut than the reference medium (and therefore need no further compression). media source. The source from which sheets are obtained for printing. Some printers support several media sources so that media with different characteristics (such as size, color , and type) can be selected when desired. Contrast with media destination. medium. A two-dimensional conceptual space with a base coordinate system from which all other coordinate systems are either directly or indirectly derived. A medium is mapped onto a physical medium in a presentation- system-dependent manner . Synonymous with medium presentation space. See also logical page, physical medium, and presentation space. Medium Map. A print control object in a Form Map that defines resource mappings and controls modifications to a form, page placement on a form, and form copy generation. See also Form Map. medium preprinted form overlay (M-PFO). In MO:DCA, a PFO that is designed to simulate a preprinted form for a sheet-side. An M-PFO is invoked with the MMC structured field and is applied last to the medium presentation space after all other data for the sheet-side has been applied. medium presentation space. A two-dimensional conceptual space with a base coordinate system from which all other coordinate systems are either directly or indirectly derived. A medium presentation space is mapped onto a physical medium in a presentation-system- dependent manner . Synonymous with medium. See also logical page, physical medium, and presentation space. metadata. Descriptive information that is associated with and augments other data. Metadata command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to associate MOCA data with objects. metadata object. In AFP , the resource object that carries metadata. Metadata Object Content Architecture (MOCA). A resource object architecture to carry metadata that serves to provide context or additional information about an AFP object or other AFP data. MFI. See mainframe interactive. MICR. See magnetic ink character recognition. Microfilm frame. A rectangular area on the microfilm bounded by imaginary , intersecting grid lines within which a data frame may be recorded. The grid lines are part of gauges used for checking microfilm, but they do not actually appear on the microfilm. mil. 1/1000 inch. mix. A method used to determine how the color of a graphics primitive is combined with the existing color of a graphics presentation space. See also foreground mix and background mix. Mixed Object Document Content Architecture (MO:DCA). An architected, presentation-system- independent data stream for interchanging documents. mixing. (1) Combining foreground and background of one presentation space with foreground and background of another presentation space in areas where the presentation spaces intersect. (2) Combining foreground and background of multiple intersecting object data elements in the object presentation space. mixing rule. A method for specifying the color attributes of the resulting foreground and background in areas where two presentation spaces intersect. M/O. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading indicate whether the construct is mandatory (M) or optional (O). MOCA. See Metadata Object Content Architecture. MO:DCA. See Mixed Object Document Content Architecture. MO:DCA GA. A MO:DCA function set that supports levels of PDF used in graphic arts printing. MO:DCA IS/1. MO:DCA Interchange Set 1. A subset of MO:DCA that defines an interchange format for presentation documents. meaning • MO:DCA IS/1
PTOCA-C-111	PTOCA Reference 207 MO:DCA IS/2. MO:DCA Interchange Set 2. A retired subset of MO:DCA that defines an interchange format for presentation documents. MO:DCA IS/3. MO:DCA Interchange Set 3. A subset of MO:DCA that defines an interchange format for print files that supersedes MO:DCA IS/1. MO:DCA-L. A MO:DCA subset that defines the OS/2 Presentation Manager (PM) metafile. This format is also known as a .met file. The definition of this MO:DCA subset is stabilized and is no longer being developed as part of the MO:DCA architecture. It is defined in the document MO:DCA-L: The OS/2 Presentation Manager Metafile (.met) Format, available at www.afpconsortium.org. MO:DCA-P . A subset of the MO:DCA architecture that defines presentation documents. This term is now synonymous with the term MO:DCA. model space. A two-dimensional conceptual space in which a picture is constructed. All model transforms are completed before a picture is constructed in a graphics model space. Contrast with graphics presentation space. Synonymous with graphics model space. model transform. A transform that is applied to drawing- order coordinates. Contrast with viewing transform. module. In a bar code symbology , the nominal width of the smallest element of a bar or space. Actual bar code symbology bars and spaces can be a single module wide or some multiple of the module width. The multiple need not be an integer . modulo-N check. A check in which an operand is divided by a modulus to generate a remainder that is retained and later used for checking. An example of an operand is the sum of a set of digits. See also modulus. modulus. In a modulo check, the number by which an operand is divided. An example of an operand is the sum of a set of digits. See also modulo-N check. monochrome. A single color . Monochrome usually refers to a black-and-white image. Also referred to as line art or bitmap mode in Adobe Photoshop ® . See also bilevel.
PTOCA-C-112	monospaced font. A font with graphic characters having a uniform character increment. The distance between reference points of adjacent graphic characters is constant in the escapement direction. The blank space between the graphic characters can vary . Synonymous with uniformly spaced font. Contrast with proportionally spaced font and typographic font. move order . A drawing order that specifies or implies movement from the current position to a given position. See also current position and given position. M-PFO. See medium preprinted form overlay (M-PFO). multilevel. Having multiple levels; for example, every point in a multilevel image can have values from 0 to n, where n is greater than 1. Contrast with bilevel. multilevel device. A device that is used in a manner that permits it to process color data of more than two levels. Contrast with bilevel device. N NACK. See Negative Acknowledge Reply . name. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading are short names that give a general indication of the contents of the construct. named color . A color that is specified with a descriptive name. An example of a named color is “green”. navigation. The traversing of a document based on links between contextually related document components. navigation link. A link type that specifies the linkage from a source document component to a contextually related target document component. Navigation links can be used to support applications such as hypertext and hypermedia. nColor color space. The color model used in IOCA images that contain color components that typically do not match any of the standard AFP color spaces, such as RGB and CMYK. Often such images contain more than four color components, although the number of color components can be anywhere from two to fifteen, inclusive. Negative Acknowledge Reply (NACK). In the IPDS architecture, a reply from a printer to a host, indicating that an exception has occurred. Contrast with Positive Acknowledge Reply . neighborhood-operation halftone. Halftone algorithm that transfers the quantization error due to thresholding to the unhalftoned neighbors of the current pixel. Error dif fusion is a neighborhood operation since it operates not only on the input pixel, but also its neighbors. Contrast with point-operation halftone. nested resource. A resource that is invoked within another resource using either an Include command or a local ID. See also nesting resource. nesting coordinate space. A coordinate space that contains another coordinate space. Examples of coordinate spaces are medium, overlay , page, and object area. nesting resource. A resource that invokes nested resources. See also nested resource. neutral white. A color attribute that gives a presentation- system-dependent default color , typically white on a screen MO:DCA IS/2 • neutral white
PTOCA-C-113	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-114	and black on a printer . Note that neutral white and color of medium are two different colors. non-presentation object. An object that is not a presentation object. nonprocess runout (NPRO). An operation that moves sheets of physical media through the printer without printing on them. This operation is used to stack the last printed sheet. no operation (NOP). A construct whose execution causes a product to proceed to the next instruction to be processed without taking any other action. NOP . See no operation. normal-duplex printing. Duplex printing that simulates the effect of physically turning the sheet around the Y m axis. NPRO. See nonprocess runout. N-up. The partitioning of a side of a sheet into a fixed number of equal size partitions. For example, 4-up divides each side of a sheet into four equal partitions. O object. (1) A collection of structured fields. The first structured field provides a begin-object function, and the last structured field provides an end-object function. The object can contain one or more other structured fields whose content consists of one or more data elements of a particular data type. An object can be assigned a name, that can be used to reference the object. Examples of objects are presentation text, font, graphics, and image objects. (2) Something that a user works with to perform a task. object area. A rectangular area in a presentation space into which a data object is mapped. The presentation space can be for a page or an overlay . Examples are a graphics object area, an image object area, and a bar code object area. object data. A collection of related data elements bundled together . Examples of object data include graphic characters, image data elements, and drawing orders. object identifier (OID). (1) A notation that assigns a globally unambiguous name to an object or a document component. The notation is defined in international standard ISO/IEC 8824(E). (2) A variable length (2-bytes long to 129-bytes long) binary ID that uniquely identifies an object. OIDs use the ASN.1 definite-short-form object identifier format defined in the ISO/IEC 8824:1990(E) international standard and described in the MO:DCA Registry Appendix of the Mixed Object Document Content Architecture Reference. An OID consists of a one-byte identifier (X'06'), followed by a one-byte length (between X'00' and X'7F'), followed by 0–127 content bytes. obsolete. Removed from the architecture, and thus ignored by receivers. OCR A. See Optical Character Recognition A. OCR B. See Optical Character Recognition B. offline. A device state in which the device is not under the direct control of a host. Contrast with online. offset. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading indicate the numeric displacement into a construct. The offset is measured in bytes and starts with byte zero. Individual bits can be expressed as displacements within bytes. OID. See object identifier . online. A device state in which the device is under the direct control of a host. Contrast with offli ne. opacity . In bar codes, the optical property of a substrate material that minimizes showing through from the back side or the next sheet. Optical Character Recognition A (OCR A). A font containing the character set in ANSI standard X3.17-1981, that contains characters that are both human readable and machine readable. Optical Character Recognition B (OCR B). A font containing the character set in ANSI standard X3.49-1975, that contains characters that are both human readable and machine readable. order . (1) In GOCA, a graphics construct that the controlling environment builds to instruct a drawing processor about what to draw and how to draw it. The order can specify , for example, that a graphics primitive be drawn, a change to drawing attributes or drawing controls be effected, or a segment be called. One or more graphics primitives can be used to draw a picture. Orders can be included in a structured field. Synonymous with drawing order . (2) In the IPDS architecture, a construct within an execute-order command. (3) In IOCA, a functional operation that is performed on the image content. ordered page. In the IPDS architecture, a logical page that does not contain any page segments or overlays, and in which all text data and all image, graphics, and bar code objects are ordered. The order of the data objects is such that physical pel locations on the physical medium are accessed by the printer in a sequential left-to-right and top- to-bottom manner , where these directions are relative to the top edge of the physical medium. Once a physical pel location has been accessed by the printer , the page data does not require the printer to access that same physical pel location again. non-presentation object • ordered page
PTOCA-C-115	PTOCA Reference 209 orientation. The angular distance a presentation space or object area is rotated in a specified coordinate system, expressed in degrees and minutes. For example, the orientation of printing on a physical medium, relative to the X m axis of the X m ,Y m coordinate system. See also presentation space orientation and text orientation. origin. The point in a coordinate system where the axes intersect. Examples of origins are the addressable position in an X m ,Y m coordinate system where both coordinate values are zero and the character reference point in a character coordinate system. orthogonal. Intersecting at right angles. An example of orthogonal is the positional relationship between the axes of a Cartesian coordinate system. outline font. A shape technology in which the graphic character shapes are represented in digital form by a series of mathematical expressions that define the outer edges of the strokes. The resultant graphic character shapes can be either solid or hollow . output profile. An ICC profile that describes the characteristics of the output device for which the image is destined. The profile is used to color match the image to the device's gamut. overhead. In a bar code symbology , the fixed number of characters required for starting, stopping, and checking a bar code symbol. overlay . (1) A resource object that contains presentation data such as, text, image, graphics, and bar code data. Overlays define their own environment and are often used as pre-defined pages or electronic forms. Overlays are classified according to how they are presented with other presentation data: a medium overlay is positioned at the origin of the medium presentation space before any pages are presented, and a page overlay is positioned at a specified point in a page's logical page. A Page Modification Control (PMC) overlay is a special type of page overlay used in MO:DCA environments. (2) The final representation of such an object on a physical medium. Contrast with page segment. Overlay command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to load, deactivate, and include overlays. overlay ID. A one-byte ID assigned by a host to an overlay . Overlay IDs are used in IPDS Begin Overlay , Deactivate Overlay , Include Overlay , and Load Copy Control commands. overlay state. An operating state that allows overlay data to be downloaded to a product. For example, a printer enters overlay state from home state when the printer receives an IPDS Begin Overlay command. overpaint. A mixing rule in which the intersection of part of a new presentation space P new with an existing presentation space P existing keeps the color attribute of P new . This is also referred to as “opaque” mixing. See also mixing rule. Contrast with blend and underpaint. overscore. A line parallel to the baseline and placed above the character . overstrike. In PTOCA, the presentation of a designated character as a string of characters in a specified text field. The intended effect is to make the resulting presentation appear as though the text field, whether filled with characters or blanks, has been marked out with the overstriking character . overstriking. The method used to merge two or more graphic characters at the same addressable position in a presentation space or on a physical medium. P page. (1) A data stream object delimited by a Begin Page structured field and an End Page structured field. A page can contain presentation data such as text, image, graphics, and bar code data. (2) The final representation of a page object on a physical medium. page counter . Bytes in an IPDS Acknowledge Reply that specify the number of pages that have passed a particular point in a logical paper path. PageDef. See Page Definition. Page Definition (PageDef). A print control object used to format line data into page data. A Page Definition contains one or more Data Maps and may optionally specify conditional processing of the line data. Synonymous with Page Map. See also Data Map. Page Format. Synonymous with Data Map. page group. A named group of sequential pages. A page group is delimited by a Begin Named Page Group structured field and an End Named Page Group structured field. A page group can contain nested page groups. All pages in the page group inherit the attributes and processing characteristics that are assigned to the page group. Page Map. A print control object used to format line data into page data. A Page Map contains one or more Data Maps and may optionally specify conditional processing of the line data. Synonymous with Page Definition. See also Data Map. page segment. (1) In the IPDS architecture, a resource object that can contain text, image, graphics, and bar code data. Page segments do not define their own environment, but are processed in the existing environment. (2) In MO:DCA, a resource object that can contain any mixture of bar code objects, graphics objects, and IOCA image objects. A page segment does not contain an active orientation • page segment
PTOCA-C-116	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-117	environment group. The environment for a page segment is defined by the active environment group of the including page or overlay . (3) The final representation of such an object on a physical medium. Contrast with overlay . Page-Segment command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to load, deactivate, and include page segments. page-segment state. An operating state that makes page-segment data available to a product. For example, a printer enters page-segment state from home state when it receives an IPDS Begin Page Segment command. page state. In the IPDS architecture, an operating state that makes page data available to a product. For example, a printer enters page state from home state when it receives an IPDS Begin Page command. paginated object. A data object that can be rendered on a single page or overlay . An example of a paginated object is a single image in a multi-image TIFF file. palette. The collection of colors or shades available to a graphics system or program. P ANT ONE ® . The proprietary P ANT ONE color matching
PTOCA-C-118	system is the most popular method of specifying extra colors—not out of the CMYK four color process—for print. P ANTONE colors are numbered and mixed from a base set of colors. By specifying a specific P ANTONE color , a designer knows that there is little chance of color variance on the presses. parameter . (1) A variable that is given a constant value for a specified application. (2) A variable used in conjunction with a command to affect its result. partition. Dividing the medium presentation space into a specified number of equal-sized areas in a manner determined by the current physical media. partitioning. A method used to place parts of a control into two or more segments or structured fields. Partitioning can cause difficulties for a receiver if one of the segments or structured fields is not received or is received out of order . pattern. An array of symbols used to fill an area. pattern attributes. The characteristics that specify the appearance of a pattern. pattern reference point. In GOCA, a position in the graphics presentation space to be used as the origin of a custom pattern; the pattern is tiled in all directions from this position. pattern set. An attribute in GOCA used to access a symbol set or coded font. pattern symbol. The geometric construct that is used repetitively to generate a pattern. Examples of pattern symbols are dots, squares, and triangles. PCL ® . A set of printer commands, developed by Hewlett-
PTOCA-C-119	Packard ® , that provide access to printer features. PCS. (1) See Print Contrast Signal. (2) See Profile Connection Space. PDF . An acronym for Acrobat ® Portable Document Format. PDF files are cross platform and contain all of the image and font data. Design attributes are retained in a compressed single package. pel. The smallest printable or displayable unit on a physical medium. In computer graphics, the smallest element of a physical medium that can be independently assigned color and intensity . Pels per inch is often used as a measurement of presentation granularity . Synonymous with picture element and pixel. perceptual rendering intent. The exact gamut mapping of the perceptual rendering intent is vendor specific and involves compromises such as trading off preservation of contrast in order to preserve detail throughout the tonal range. It is useful for general reproduction of images, particularly pictorial or photographic-type images. PFB file. A file containing the font information required for presenting the characters of a font. The shape information (glyph procedures) contained in this file is in a binary encoded format defined by Adobe Systems Inc., optimized for small character set fonts having one to two hundred characters (for example, English, Greek, and Cyrillic). PFO. See preprinted form overlay (PFO). physical file. A single operating system file intended for presentation. The format of the file, and its delineation, is defined by the operating system. physical medium. A physical entity on which information is presented. Examples of a physical medium are a sheet of paper , a roll of paper , an envelope, and a display screen. See also medium presentation space and sheet. physical printable area. A bounded area defined on a side of a sheet within which printing can take place. The physical printable area is an attribute of sheet size and printer capabilities, and cannot be altered by the host. The physical printable area is mapped to the medium presentation space, and is used in user printable area and valid printable area calculations. Contrast with user printable area and valid printable area. picket fence bar code. A bar code pattern presenting the axis of the symbol in its length dimension parallel to the X bc axis of the bar code presentation space. Synonymous with horizontal bar code. Page-Segment command set • picket fence bar code
PTOCA-C-120	PTOCA Reference 21 1 picture chain. A string of segments that defines a picture. Synonymous with segment chain. picture element. The smallest printable or displayable unit on a physical medium. In computer graphics, the smallest element of a physical medium that can be independently assigned color and intensity . Picture elements per inch is often used as a measurement of presentation granularity . Synonymous with pel and pixel. pixel. The smallest printable or displayable unit on a physical medium. In computer graphics, the smallest element of a physical medium that can be independently assigned color and intensity . Picture elements per inch is often used as a measurement of presentation granularity . Synonymous with pel and picture element. PMC-PFO. See PMC preprinted form overlay (PMC- PFO). PMC preprinted form overlay (PMC-PFO). In MO:DCA, a PFO that is designed to simulate a preprinted form for a page. A PMC-PFO is invoked with the PMC structured field and is applied last to the page presentation space after all other data for the page has been applied. PNG. See Portable Network Graphics. point. (1) A unit of measure used mainly for measuring typographical material. There are seventy-two points to an inch. (2) In GOCA, a parameter that specifies the position within the drawing order coordinate space. See also drawing order coordinate space. point-operation halftone. Any halftone algorithm that produces output for a given location based only on the single input pixel at that location, independent of its neighbors. Thus, it is accomplished by a simple point-wise comparison of the input image against a predetermined threshold array or mask. Contrast with neighborhood- operation halftone. polyline. A sequence of connected lines. Portable Network Graphics (PNG). A lossless image format. portrait. A presentation orientation in which the X m axis is parallel to the short sides of a rectangular physical medium. Contrast with landscape. position. A position in a presentation space or on a physical medium that can be identified by a coordinate from the coordinate system of the presentation space or physical medium. See also picture element. Synonymous with addressable position. Positive Acknowledge Reply (ACK). In the IPDS architecture, a reply to an IPDS command that has its acknowledgment-required flag on and in which no exception is reported. Contrast with Negative Acknowledge Reply . PostScript. A page description programming language created by Adobe Systems Inc. that is a presentation- system-independent industry standard for outputting documents and graphics. It describes pages to any output device with a PostScript interpreter . posture. Inclination of a letter with respect to a vertical axis. Examples of inclination are upright and inclined. An example of upright is Roman. An example of inclined is italics. pragmatics. Information related to the usage of a construct. See also semantics and syntax. preprinted form. A form or sheet that is not blank when it is selected as input media for presentation. preprinted form overlay (PFO). An overlay and associated processing designed to simulate a preprinted form. presentation data stream. A presentation data stream that is processed in AFP environments. The MO:DCA architecture describes the AFP interchange data stream. The IPDS architecture describes the AFP printer data stream. presentation device. A device that produces character shapes, graphics pictures, images, or bar code symbols on a physical medium. Examples of a physical medium are a display screen and a sheet of paper . presentation object. An object that describes presentation data such as text, image, and graphics, in a paginated, final-form format suitable for presentation on a page. Contrast with non-presentation object. presentation position. An addressable position that is coincident with a character reference point. See also addressable position and character reference point. presentation process. Synonymous with presentation system. presentation services. In printing, a software component that communicates with a printer using a printer data stream, such as the IPDS data stream, to print pages, download and manage print resources, and handle exceptions. presentation space. A conceptual address space with a specified coordinate system and a set of addressable positions. The coordinate system and addressable positions can coincide with those of a physical medium. Examples of presentation spaces are medium, logical page, and object area. See also graphics presentation space, image presentation space, logical page, medium presentation space, and text presentation space. presentation space orientation. The number of degrees and minutes a presentation space is rotated in a specified coordinate system. For example, the orientation of printing picture chain • presentation space orientation
PTOCA-C-121	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-122	on a physical medium, relative to the X m axis of the X m ,Y m coordinate system. See also orientation and text orientation. presentation system. A system for presenting data. In AFP environments such a system normally contains at least a formatting application, a print server , and a printer . Synonymous with presentation process. presentation text object. An object that contains presentation text data. See also object. Presentation Text Object Content Architecture (PTOCA). An architected collection of constructs used to interchange and present presentation text data. print contrast. A measurement of the ratio of the reflectivities between the bars and spaces of a bar code symbol, commonly expressed as a percent. Synonymous with Print Contrast Signal. Print Contrast Signal (PCS). A measurement of the ratio of the reflectivities between the bars and spaces of a bar code symbol, commonly expressed as a percent. Synonymous with print contrast. print control object. A resource object that contains layout, finishing, and resource mapping information used to present a document on physical media. Examples of print control objects are Form Maps and Medium Maps. print direction. In FOCA, the direction in which successive characters appear in a line of text. print file. A file that is created for the purpose of printing data. The print file is the highest level of the MO:DCA data- stream document-component hierarchy . printing baseline. A conceptual line with respect to which successive characters are aligned. See also character baseline. Synonymous with baseline and sequential baseline. print quality . In bar codes, the measure of compliance of a bar code symbol to the requirements of dimensional tolerance, edge roughness, spots, voids, reflectance, PCS, and quiet zones defined within a bar code symbology . print unit. In the IPDS architecture, a group of pages bounded by XOH-DGBcommands and subject to the group operation keep group together as a print unit. A print unit is commonly referred to as a print job. process color . A color that is specified as a combination of the components, or primaries, of a color space. A process color is rendered by mixing the specified amounts of the primaries. An example of a process color is C=0.1, M=0.8, Y=0.2, K=0.1 in the cyan/magenta/yellow/black (CMYK) color space. Contrast with spot color . process element. In MO:DCA, a document component that is defined by a structured field and that facilitates a form of document processing that does not affect the presentation of the document. Examples of process elements are T ag Logical Elements (TLEs) that specify document attributes and Link Logical Elements (LLEs) that specify linkages between document components. Profile Connection Space (PCS). The reference color space defined by ICC, in which colors are encoded in order to provide an interface for connecting source and destination transforms. The PCS is based on the CIE 1931 standard colorimetric observer . prolog. The first portion of a segment's data. Prologs are optional. They contain attribute settings and drawing controls. Synonymous with segment prolog. propagation. A method used to retain a segment's properties through other segments that it calls. proper subset. A set whose members are also members of a larger set. proportion. Relationship of the width of a letter to its height. proportionally spaced font. A font with graphic characters that have varying character increments. Proportional spacing can be used to provide the appearance of even spacing between presented characters and to eliminate excess blank space around narrow characters. An example of a narrow character is the letter i. Synonymous with typographic font. Contrast with monospaced font and uniformly spaced font. proportional spacing. The spacing of characters in a printed line so that each character is allotted a space based on the character's width. Proportional Spacing Machine font (PSM font). A font originating with the electric typewriter and having character increment values that are integer multiples of the narrowest character width. PSM font. See Proportional Spacing Machine font. PTOCA. See Presentation Text Object Content Architecture. Q quantization. The process of reducing an image with many colors to one with fewer colors, usually in preparation for its conversion to a palette-based image. As a result, most parts of the image (that is, most of its pixels) are given slightly different colors that amounts to a certain level of error at each location. Since photographic images usually have extended regions of similar colors that get converted to the same quantized color , a quantized image tends to have a flat or banded (contoured) appearance unless it is also dithered. presentation system • quantization
PTOCA-C-123	PTOCA Reference 213 quiet zone. A clear space that contains no machine- readable marks preceding the start character of a bar code symbol or following the stop character . Synonymous with clear area. Contrast with intercharacter gap and space. R radial gradient. In GOCA, a gradient where the color change takes place between two full arcs. Contrast with linear gradient. range. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading give numeric ranges applicable to a construct. The ranges can be expressed in binary , decimal, or hexadecimal. The range can consist of a single value. raster . (1) The area of the video display that is covered by sweeping the electron beam of the display horizontally and vertically . Normally the electronics of the display sweep each line horizontally from top to bottom and return to the top during the vertical retrace interval. (2) In computer graphics, a predetermined pattern of lines that provides uniform coverage of a display space. (3) In nonimpact printers, an on-or-off pattern of electrostatic images produced by the laser print head under control of the character generator . raster direction. An attribute that controls the direction in which a character string grows relative to the inline direction. Values are: left-to-right, right-to-left, top-to- bottom, and bottom-to-top. rasterize. To convert presentation data into raster (bitmap) form for display or printing. raster pattern. A rectangular array of pels arranged in rows called scan lines. readability . The characteristics of visual material that determine the degree of comfort with which it can be read over a sustained period of time. Examples of characteristics that influence readability are type quality , spacing, and composition. reader . In bar code systems, the scanner or combination of scanner and decoder . See also decoder and scanner . read rate. In bar codes, the ratio of the number of successful reads on the first attempt to the total number of attempts made to obtain a successful read. Synonymous with first read rate. rearranged file. A file containing the mapping of code points to the character index values used in a CID file and to the character names used in one or more PFB files. This is a special case of the CMAP file that permits linking of multiple font files and formats together . The code points conform to a particular character coding system that is used to identify the characters in a document data stream. The mapping information in this file is in an ASCII file format defined by Adobe Systems Inc. record-format line data. A form of line data where each record is preceded by a 10-byte identifier . The record is presented by matching its ID to the ID specified on a Record Descriptor in the Data Map of a Page Definition. recording algorithm. An algorithm that determines the relationship between the physical location and logical location of image points in image data. recovery-unit group. (1) In the IPDS architecture, a group of pages identified by the XOH Define Group Boundary command and controlled by the Keep-Group- T ogether-as-a-Recovery-Unit group operation specified by the XOH Specify Group Operation command. The recovery-unit group also includes all copies specified by the Load Copy Control command. (2) In the MO:DCA architecture, a group of pages identified as a unit for error recovery purposes, such as in cases of a printer recovery from an error that occurs in the middle of the group. A recovery-unit group is identified by a Begin Named Group (BNG) and End Named Group (ENG) pair that contains a Keep Group T ogether (X'9D') triplet. redaction. The process of applying an opaque mask over a page so that a selected portion of the page is visible. Since this function is typically used to prevent unauthorized viewing of data, an associated security level is also provided. reflectance. In bar codes, the ratio of the amount of light of a specified wavelength or series of wavelengths reflected from a test surface to the amount of light reflected from a barium oxide or magnesium oxide standard under similar illumination conditions. relative coordinate. One of the coordinates that identify the location of an addressable point by means of a displacement from some other addressable point. Contrast with absolute coordinate. relative line. A straight line developed from a specified point by a given displacement. relative metrics. Graphic character measurements expressed as fractions of a square, called the Em square, whose sides correspond to the vertical size of the font. Because the measurements are relative to the size of the Em square, the same metrics can be used for different point sizes and different raster pattern resolutions. Relative metrics require defining the unit of measure for the Em square, the point size of the font, and, if applicable, the resolution of the raster pattern. relative move. A method used to establish a new current position. Distance and direction from the current position are used to establish the new current position. The direction of displacement is inline along the I axis in the I direction, or baseline along the B axis in the B direction, or both. quiet zone • relative move
PTOCA-C-124	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-125	relative positioning. The establishment of a position within a coordinate system as an offset from the current position. Contrast with absolute positioning. rendering intent. A particular gamut-mapping style or method of converting colors in one gamut to colors in another gamut. ICC profiles support four different rendering intents: perceptual, media-relative colorimetric, saturation, and ICC-absolute colorimetric. repeating group. A group of parameter specifications that can be repeated. repeat string. A method used to repeat the character content of text data until a given number of characters has been processed. Any control sequences in the text data are ignored. This method provides the functional equivalence of a T ransparent Data control sequence when the given number of repeated characters is equal to the number of characters in the text data. reserved. Having no assigned meaning and put aside for future use. The content of reserved fields is not used by receivers, and should be set by generators to a specified value, if given, or to binary zeros. A reserved field or value can be assigned a meaning by an architecture at any time. reset color . The color of a presentation space before any data is added to it. Synonymous with color of medium. resident resource. In the IPDS architecture, a resource in a printer or in a resource-caching intermediate device. A resident resource can be installed manually or can be captured by the device if it is intended for public use. A resident resource is referenced by a global ID that is valid for the duration of the resource's presence in the device. Contrast with downloaded resource. resolution. (1) A measure of the sharpness of an input or output device capability , as given by some measure relative to the distance between two points or lines that can just be distinguished. (2) The number of addressable pels per unit of length. resolution correction. A method used to present an image on a printer without changing the physical size or proportions of the image when the resolutions of the printer and the image are different. resolution-correction ratio. The ratio of a device resolution to an image presentation space resolution. resolution modification. A method used to write an image on an image presentation space without changing the physical size of the image when the resolutions of the presentation space and the image are different. resource. An object that is referenced by a data stream or by another object to provide data or information. Resource objects can be stored in libraries. In MO:DCA, resource objects can be contained within a resource group. Examples of resources are fonts, overlays, and page segments. See also downloaded resource, resident resource, and secondary resource. resource caching. In the IPDS architecture, a function in a printer or intermediate device whereby downloaded resources are captured and made resident in the printer or intermediate device. retired. Set aside for a particular purpose, and not available for any other purpose. Retired fields and values are specified for compatibility with existing products and identify one of the following: • Fields or values that have been used by a product in a
PTOCA-C-126	manner not compliant with the architected definition • Fields or values that have been removed from an
PTOCA-C-127	architecture reuse LND. A Line Descriptor (LND) in a chain of LNDs, also called a reuse chain, where all LNDs process fields in the same line-data record. See also base LND. RGB. Red, green and blue, the additive primary colors. RGBcolor space. The basic additive color model used for color video display , as on a computer monitor . RIP . A raster image processor (RIP) is a hardware or software tool that processes a presentation data stream and converts it—rasterizes it—to a printable format. RM4SCC. See Royal Mail 4 State Customer Code. Roman. Relating to a type style with upright letters. root segment. A segment in the picture chain that is not called by any other segment. If a single segment that is not in a segment chain is drawn, it is treated as a root segment for the duration of the drawing process. rotating. In computer graphics, turning all or part of a picture about an axis perpendicular to the presentation space. rotation. The orientation of a presentation space with respect to the coordinate system of a containing presentation space. Rotation is measured in degrees in a clockwise direction. Zero-degree rotation exists when the angle between a presentation space's positive X axis and the containing presentation space's positive X axis is zero degrees. Contrast with character rotation. row . A subarray that consists of all elements that have an identical position within the high dimension of a regular two-dimensional array . Royal Mail 4 State Customer Code (RM4SCC). A two- dimensional bar code symbology developed by the United Kingdom's Royal Mail postal service for use in automated mail-sorting processes. relative positioning • Royal Mail 4 State Customer Code (RM4SCC)
PTOCA-C-128	PTOCA Reference 215 rule. A solid line of any line width. S sans serif. A type style characterized by strokes that end with no flaring or crossing of lines at the stroke ends. Contrast with serif. saturation rendering intent. The exact gamut mapping of the saturation rendering intent is vendor specific and involves compromises such as trading off preservation of hue in order to preserve the vividness of pure colors. It is useful for images that contain objects such as charts or diagrams. SBCS. See single-byte character set. SBIN. A data type for architecture syntax, that indicates that one or more bytes be interpreted as a signed binary number , with the sign bit in the high-order position of the leftmost byte. Positive numbers are represented in true binary notation with the sign bit set to B'0'. Negative numbers are represented in twos-complement binary notation with a B'1' in the sign-bit position. Scalable V ector Graphics (SVG). An XML-based vector image format. scaling. Making all or part of a picture smaller or larger by multiplying the coordinate values of the picture by a constant amount. If the same multiplier is applied along both dimensions, the scaling is uniform, and the proportions of the picture are unaffected. Otherwise, the scaling is anamorphic, and the proportions of the picture are changed. See also anamorphic scaling. scaling ratio. (1) The ratio of an image-object-area size to its image-presentation-space size. (2) In FOCA, the ratio of horizontal to vertical scaling of the graphic characters. See also horizontal scale factor . scan line. A series of picture elements. Scan lines in raster patterns form images. See also picture element and raster pattern. scanner . In bar codes, an electronic device that converts optical information into electrical signals. See also reader . screen. (1) A halftone-threshold array . (2) The display surface of a display device such as a computer monitor . scrolling. A method used to move a displayed image vertically or horizontally so that new data appears at one edge as old data disappears at the opposite edge. Data disappears at the edge toward which an image is moved and appears at the edge away from which the data is moved. SDA. See special data area. secondary resource. A resource for an object that is itself a resource. section. A portion of a double-byte code page that consists of 256 consecutive entries. The first byte of a two- byte code point is the section identifier . A code-page section is also called a code-page ward in some environments. See also code page and code point. section identifier . A value that identifies a section. Synonymous with section number . section number . A value that identifies a section. Synonymous with section identifier . secure overlay . An overlay that can be printed anywhere within the physical printable area. A secure overlay is not affected by an IPDS Define User Area command. segment. (1) In GOCA, a set of graphics drawing orders contained within a Begin Segment command. See also graphics segment. (2) In IOCA, image content bracketed by Begin Segment and End Segment self-defining fields. See also image segment. segment chain. A string of segments that defines a picture. Synonymous with picture chain. segment exception condition. An architecture-provided classification of the errors that can occur in a segment. Segment exception conditions are raised when a segment error is detected. Examples of segment errors are segment format, parameter content, and sequence errors. segment offset. A position within a segment, measured in bytes from the beginning of the segment. The beginning of a segment is always at offset zero. segment prolog. The first portion of a segment's data. Prologs are optional. They contain attribute settings and drawing controls. Synonymous with prolog. segment properties. The segment characteristics used by a drawing process. Examples of segment properties are segment name, segment length, chained, dynamic, highlighted, propagated, and visible. segment transform. A model transform that is applied to a whole segment. self checking. In bar codes, using a checking algorithm that can be applied to each character independently to guard against undetected errors. semantics. The meaning of the parameters of a construct. See also pragmatics and syntax. sequential baseline. A conceptual line with respect to which successive characters are aligned. See also character baseline. Synonymous with baseline and printing baseline. rule • sequential baseline
PTOCA-C-129	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-130	sequential baseline position. The current addressable position for a baseline in a presentation space or on a physical medium. See also baseline coordinate and current baseline presentation coordinate. serif. A short line angling from or crossing the free end of a stroke. Examples are horizontal lines at the tops and bottoms of vertical strokes on capital letters, for example, I and H, and the decorative strokes at the ends of the horizontal members of a capital E. Contrast with sans serif. server . In a network, hardware or software that provides facilities to other stations. Examples include: a file server , a printer server , and a mail server . session. In the IPDS architecture, the period of time during which a presentation services program has a two- way communication with an IPDS device. The session consists of a physical attachment and a communications protocol; the communications protocol carries an IPDS dialog by transparently transmitting IPDS commands and Acknowledge Replies. See also IPDS dialog. setup file. In the IPDS architecture, an object container that provides setup information for a printer . Setup files are downloaded in home state and take effect immediately . Setup files are not managed as resources. setup name. A user-created name for a set of specific settings on a device. There is at most one setup name active on a device at any time, and it is allowed for there to be no active setup name on a device. shade. V ariation of a color produced by mixing it with black. shape compression. A method used to compress digitally encoded character shapes using a specified algorithm. shape technology . A method used to encode character shapes digitally using a specified algorithm. shear . The angle of slant of a character cell that is not perpendicular to a baseline. Synonymous with character shear . shearline direction. In GOCA, the direction specified by the character shear and character angle attributes. sheet. A division of the physical medium; multiple sheets can exist on a physical medium. For example, a roll of paper might be divided by a printer into rectangular pieces of paper , each representing a sheet. Envelopes are an example of a physical medium that comprises only one sheet. The IPDS architecture defines four types of sheets: cut-sheet media, continuous-form media, envelopes, and computer output on microfilm. Each type of sheet has a top edge. A sheet has two sides, a front side and a back side. Synonymous with form. show through. In bar codes, the generally undesirable property of a substrate that permits underlying markings to be seen. side. A physical surface of a sheet. A sheet has a front side and a back side. See also sheet. signed integers. The positive natural numbers (1, 2, 3, ...), their negatives (-1, -2, -3, ...) and the number zero. The set of all integers is usually denoted in mathematics by Z, which stands for Zahlen (German for “numbers”). simplex printing. A method used to print data on one side of a sheet; the other side is left blank. Contrast with duplex printing. single-byte character set (SBCS). A character set that can contain up to 256 characters. single-byte coded font. A coded font in which the code points are one byte long. slope. The posture, or incline, of the main strokes in the graphic characters of a font. Slope is specified in degrees by a font designer . soft object. An object that is not mapped in an environment group and is therefore not sent to the presentation device until it is referenced within a page or overlay . Contrast with hard object. space. In bar codes, the lighter element of a printed bar code symbol, usually formed by the background between bars. See also element. Contrast with bar , clear area, intercharacter gap, and quiet zone. space width. In bar codes, the thickness of a bar code symbol space measured from the edge closest to the symbol start character to the trailing edge of the same space. spanning. In the IPDS architecture, a method in which one command is used to start a sequence of constructs. Subsequent commands continue and terminate that sequence. See also control sequence chaining. special data area (SDA). The data area in an IPDS Acknowledge Reply that contains data requested by the host or generated by a printer as a result of an exception. Specifications for W eb Offset Publications (SWOP). A standard set of specifications for color separations, proofs, and printing to ensure consistency of color printing. spot. In bar codes, the undesirable presence of ink or dirt in a bar code symbol space. spot color . A color that is specified with a unique identifier such as a number . A spot color is normally rendered with a custom colorant instead of with a combination of process color primaries. See also highlight color . Contrast with process color . sequential baseline position • spot color
PTOCA-C-131	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-132	Article Numbering (EAN), Japanese Article Numbering (JAN), and Universal Product Code (UPC). symbol set. A coded font that is usually simpler in structure than a fully described font. Symbol sets are used where typographic quality is not required. Examples of devices that might not provide typographic quality are dot- matrix printers and displays. See also character set, marker set, and pattern set. synchronous exception. In the IPDS architecture, a data-stream, function no longer achievable, or resource- storage exception that must be reported to the host before a printer can return a Positive Acknowledge Reply or can increment the received-page counter for a page containing the exception. Synchronous exceptions are those with action code X'01', X'06', X'0C', or X'1F'. See also data- stream exception. Contrast with asynchronous exception. syntax. The rules governing the structure of a construct. See also pragmatics and semantics. system-level font resource. A common-source font from which: • Document-processing applications can obtain resolution-
PTOCA-C-133	independent formatting information. • Device-service applications can obtain device-specific
PTOCA-C-134	presentation information. T tag. A data structure that is used within the data portion of a color management resource (CMR). A CMR tag consists of TagID, FieldType, Count, and ValueOffset. T agged Image File Format (TIFF). A rich and flexible graphics image format. temporary baseline. The shifted baseline used for subscript and superscript. temporary baseline coordinate. The B value of the I,B coordinate pair of an addressable position on the temporary baseline. temporary baseline increment. A positive or negative value that is added to the current baseline presentation coordinate to specify the position of a temporary baseline in a presentation space or on a physical medium. Several increments might have been used to place a temporary baseline at the current baseline presentation coordinate. tertiary resource. A resource for an object that is itself a secondary resource to another resource. text. A graphic representation of information. Text can consist of alphanumeric characters and symbols arranged in paragraphs, tables, columns, and other shapes. An example of text is the data sent in an IPDS Write Text command. Text command set. In the IPDS architecture, a collection of commands used to present PTOCA text data in a page, page segment, or overlay . text major . A description for text where the Presentation Text Data Descriptor (PTD) is specified in page controls. In MO:DCA, the PTD is in the Active Environment Group (AEG) for the page; in IPDS, the PTD is specified as initial text-major conditions in the Logical Page Descriptor command. text object. (1) An object that contains text data. (2) A presentation-system-independent, self-defining representation of a two-dimensional presentation space, called the text object space, that contains presentation text data. text object space. Synonymous with text presentation space. text orientation. A description of the appearance of text as a combination of inline direction and baseline direction. See also baseline direction, inline direction, orientation, and presentation space orientation. text presentation. The transformation of document graphic character content and its associated font information into a visible form. An example of a visible form of text is character shapes on a physical medium. text presentation space. A two-dimensional conceptual space in which text is generated for presentation on an output medium. throughscore. A line parallel to the baseline and placed through the character . TIFF . See T agged Image File Format. tint. V ariation of a color produced by mixing it with white. toned. Containing marking agents such as toner or ink. Contrast with untoned. tone transfer curve. A mathematical representation of the relationship between the input and output of a system, subsystem, or equipment. The function is normally one dimensional consisting of a single channel of input corresponding to a single channel of output. In imaging systems, it is mainly used for contrast adjustments. In printing, the tone transfer curve is also used to modify images to compensate for dot gain. transform. A modification of one or more characteristics of a picture. Examples of picture characteristics that can be transformed are position, orientation, and size. See also model transform, segment transform, and viewing transform. transform matrix. A matrix that is applied to a set of coordinates to produce a transform. symbol set • transform matrix
PTOCA-C-135	PTOCA Reference 219 translating. In computer graphics, moving all or part of a picture in the presentation space from one location to another without rotating. transparent data. A method used to indicate that any control sequences occurring in a specified portion of data can be ignored. trimming. Eliminating those parts of a picture that are outside of a clipping boundary such as a viewing window or presentation space. See also viewing window . Synonymous with clipping. triplet. A three-part self-defining variable-length parameter consisting of a length byte, an identifier byte, and parameter-value bytes. triplet identifier . A one-byte type identifier for a triplet. tristimulus values. Three values that together are used to describe a specific color . These values are the amounts of three reference colors (such as red, green, and blue) that can be mixed to give the same visual sensation as the specific color . truncation. Planned or unplanned end of a presentation space or data presentation. This can occur when the presentation space extends beyond one or more boundaries of its containing presentation space or when there is more data than can be contained in the presentation space. tumble-duplex printing. A method used to simulate the effect of physically turning a sheet around the X m axis. twip. A unit of measure equal to 1/20 of a point. There are 1440 twips in one inch.
PTOCA-C-136	type. A table heading for architecture syntax. The entries under this heading indicate the types of data present in a construct. Examples include: BITS, CHAR, CODE, SBIN, UBIN, UNDF . typeface. All characters of a single type family or style, weight class, width class, and posture, regardless of size. For example, Helvetica Bold Condensed Italics, in any point size. type family . All characters of a single design, regardless of attributes such as width, weight, posture, and size. Examples are Courier and Gothic. type structure. Attributes of characters other than type family or typeface. Examples are solid shape, hollow shape, and overstruck. type style. The form of characters within the same font, for example, Courier or Gothic. type weight. A parameter indicating the degree of boldness of a typeface. A character's stroke thickness determines its type weight. Examples are light, medium, and bold. Synonymous with weight class. type width. A parameter indicating a relative change from the font's normal width-to-height ratio. Examples are normal, condensed, and expanded. Synonymous with width class. typographic font. A font with graphic characters that have varying character increments. Proportional spacing can be used to provide the appearance of even spacing between presented characters and to eliminate excess blank space around narrow characters. An example of a narrow character is the letter i. Synonymous with proportionally spaced font. Contrast with monospaced font and uniformly spaced font. U UBIN. A data type for architecture syntax, indicating one or more bytes to be interpreted as an unsigned binary number . unarchitected. Identifies data that is neither defined nor controlled by an architecture. Contrast with architected. unbounded character box. A character box that can have blank space on any sides of the character shape. underpaint. A mixing rule in which the intersection of part of a new presentation space P new with part of an existing presentation space P existing keeps the color attribute of P existing . This is also referred to as “transparent” or “leave
PTOCA-C-137	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-138	UTF-8 and all 7-bit ASCIIcharacters can be encoded in one byte. UTF-16 The default Unicode encoding. A fixed, two-byte Unicode encoding form that can contain surrogates and identifies the byte order of each UTF-16 code point via a Byte Order Mark in the first 2 bytes of the data. Surrogates are pairs of Unicode code points that allow for the encoding of as many as 1 million additional characters without any use of escape codes. UTF-16BE UTF-16 that uses big endian byte order; this is the byte order for all multi-byte data within AFP data streams. The Byte Order Mark is not necessary when the data is externally identified as UTF-16BE (or UTF-16LE). UTF-16LE UTF-16 that uses little endian byte order . UTF-32 A fixed, four-byte Unicode encoding form in which each UTF-32 code point is precisely identical to the Unicode code point. UTF-32BE UTF-32 serialized as bytes in most- significant-byte-first order (big endian). UTF-32BE is structurally the same as UCS-4. UTF-32LE UTF-32 serialized as bytes in least- significant-byte-first order (little endian). uniformly spaced font. A font with graphic characters having a uniform character increment. The distance between reference points of adjacent graphic characters is constant in the escapement direction. The blank space between the graphic characters can vary . Synonymous with monospaced font. Contrast with proportionally spaced font and typographic font. Uniform Symbol Specification (USS). A series of bar code symbology specifications published by AIM; currently included are USS-Interleaved 2 of 5, USS-39, USS-93, USS-Codabar , and USS-128. unit base. A one-byte code that represents the length of the measurement base. For example, X'00' might specify that the measurement base is ten inches. Universal Product Code (UPC). A standard bar code symbology , commonly used to mark the price of items in stores, that can be read and interpreted by a computer . untoned. Unmarked portion of a physical medium. Contrast with toned. UP³I. Universal Printer Pre- and Post-Processing Interface; an industry standard interface designed for use in complex printing systems. A specification for this interface can be obtained at www.afpconsortium.org. UP A. See user printable area. UPC. See Universal Product Code. uppercase. Pertaining to capital letters. Examples of capital letters are A, B, and C. Contrast with lowercase. upstream data. IPDS commands that exist in a logical path from a specific point in a printer back to, but not including, host presentation services. usable area. An area on a physical medium that can be used to present data. See also viewport. user printable area (UP A). The portion of the physical printable area to which user-generated data is restricted. See also logical page, physical printable area, and valid printable area. USS. See Uniform Symbol Specification. UTC. Coordinated Universal T ime, the standard time reference for Earth and the human race. Knowing the UTC time and one's time zone offset from it, makes it possible to calculate the local time; for example, 1:00 PM UTC corresponds to 5:00 AM Pacific Standard T ime (on the same day). UTC is almost the same thing as Greenwich Mean T ime (GMT), that was originally used as the standard time reference. V valid printable area (VP A). The intersection of a logical page with the area of the medium presentation space in which printing is allowed. If the logical page is a secure overlay , the area in which printing is allowed is the physical printable area. If the logical page is not a secure overlay and if a user printable area is defined, the area in which printing is allowed is the intersection of the physical printable area with the user printable area. If a user printable area is not defined, the area in which printing is allowed is the physical printable area. See also logical page, physical printable area, secure overlay , and user printable area. variable space. A method used to assign a character increment dimension of varying size to space characters. The space characters are used to distribute white space within a text line. The white space is distributed by expanding or contracting the dimension of the variable space character's increment dependent upon the amount of white space to be distributed. See also variable space character and variable space character increment. variable space character . The code point assigned by the data stream for which the character increment varies according to the semantics and pragmatics of the variable space function. This code point is not presented, but its character increment parameter is used to provide spacing. See also variable space character increment. UTF-16 • variable space character
PTOCA-C-139	PTOCA Reference 221 variable space character increment. The variable value associated with a variable space character . The variable space character increment is used to calculate the dimension from the current presentation position to a new presentation position when a variable space character is found. See also variable space character . vector graphics. A vector has a defined starting point, a designated direction, and a specified distance. V ector graphics is line-based graphics data, where vectors determine how straight and curved lines are shaped between specific points. A picture consists of lines and colors to fill the areas enclosed by the lines. verifier . In bar code systems, a device that measures the bars, spaces, quiet zones, and optical characteristics of a bar code symbol to determine if the symbol meets the requirements of a bar code symbology , specification, or standard. vertical bar code. A bar code pattern that presents the axis of the symbol in its length dimension parallel to the Y bc axis of the bar code presentation space. Synonymous with ladder bar code. vertical font size. (1) A characteristic value, perpendicular to the character baseline, that represents the size of all graphic characters in a font. Synonymous with font height. (2) In a font character set, nominal vertical font size is a font-designer defined value corresponding to the nominal distance between adjacent baselines when character rotation is zero degrees and no external leading is used. This distance represents the baseline-to-baseline increment that includes the font's maximum baseline extent and the designer's recommendation for internal leading. The font designer can also define a minimum and a maximum vertical font size to represent the limits of scaling. (3) In font referencing, the specified vertical font size is the desired size of the font when the characters are presented. If this size is different from the nominal vertical font size specified in a font character set, the character shapes and character metrics might need to be scaled prior to presentation. vertical scale factor . In outline-font referencing, the specified vertical adjustment of the Em square. The vertical scale factor is specified in 1440ths of an inch. When the horizontal and vertical scale factors are different, anamorphic scaling occurs. See also horizontal scale factor . viewing transform. A transform that is applied to model- space coordinates. Contrast with model transform. viewing window . That part of a model space that is transformed, clipped, and moved into a graphics presentation space. viewport. The portion of a usable area that is mapped to the graphics presentation space window . See also graphics model space and graphics presentation space. visibility . The property of a segment that declares whether the part of a picture defined by the segment is to be displayed or not displayed during the drawing process. void. In bar codes, the undesirable absence of ink in a bar code symbol bar element. VP A. See valid printable area. W ward. A deprecated term for section. weight class. A parameter indicating the degree of boldness of a typeface. A character's stroke thickness determines its weight class. Examples are light, medium, and bold. Synonymous with type weight. white point. One of a number of reference illuminants used in colorimetry that serve to define the color “white”. Depending on the application, different definitions of white are needed to give acceptable results. For example, photographs taken indoors might be lit by incandescent lights, that are relatively orange compared to daylight. Defining “white” as daylight will give unacceptable results when attempting to color correct a photograph taken with incandescent lighting. white space. The portion of a line that is not occupied by characters when the characters of all the words that can be placed on a line and the spaces between those words are assembled or formatted on a line. When a line is justified, the white space is distributed among the words, characters, or both on the line in some specified manner . See also controlled white space. width class. A parameter indicating a relative change from the font's normal width-to-height ratio. Examples are normal, condensed, and expanded. Synonymous with type width. window . A predefined part of a graphics presentation space. See also graphics presentation space window . writing mode. An identified mode for the setting of text in a writing system, usually corresponding to a nominal escapement direction of the graphic characters in that mode; for example, left-to-right, right-to-left, top-to-bottom. X X bc extent. The size of a bar code presentation space in the X bc dimension. See also bar code presentation space. X bc ,Y bc coordinate system. The bar code presentation space coordinate system. X dimension. In bar codes, the nominal dimension of the narrow bars and spaces in a bar code symbol. variable space character increment • X dimension
PTOCA-C-140	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-141	X g ,Y g coordinate system. In the IPDS architecture, the graphics presentation space coordinate system. X height. The nominal height above the baseline, ignoring the ascender , of the lowercase characters in a font. X height is usually the height of the lowercase letter x. See also lowercase and ascender . X io ,Y io coordinate system. The IO-Image presentation space coordinate system. XML. See Extensible Markup Language. XMP . See Extensible Metadata Platform. X m ,Y m coordinate system. (1) In the IPDS architecture, the medium presentation space coordinate system. (2) In MO:DCA, the medium coordinate system. X oa ,Y oa coordinate system. The object area coordinate system. X ol ,Y ol coordinate system. The overlay coordinate system. X p extent. The size of a presentation space or logical page in the X p dimension. See also presentation space and logical page. X pg ,Y pg coordinate system. The coordinate system of a page presentation space. This coordinate system describes the size, position, and orientation of a page presentation space. Orientation of an X pg ,Y pg coordinate system is relative to an environment specified coordinate system, for example, an X m ,Y m coordinate system. X p ,Y p coordinate system. The coordinate system of a presentation space or a logical page. This coordinate system describes the size, position, and orientation of a presentation space or a logical page. Orientation of an X p , Y p coordinate system is relative to an environment- specified coordinate system. An example of an environment-specified coordinate system is the X m ,Y m coordinate system. The X p ,Y p coordinate system origin is specified by an IPDS Logical Page Position command. See also logical page, medium presentation space, and presentation space. X qr ,Y qr coordinate system. In the BCOCA architecture, the coordinate system defined by the QR Code symbol when producing a QR Code with Image bar code. Y Y bc extent. The size of a bar code presentation space in the Y bc dimension. See also bar code presentation space. YCbCr . A three-component color space that approximately models how color is interpreted by the human visual system, with an intensity value and two color values. YCbCr and YCrCb use the same three values, but in a different order . YCCK. CMYK data carried in the luminance-chrominance form. YCC are computed from CMY , while K is the black channel carried in the reverse-video form (K = 255 - K). See Appendix B, “Adobe APP14 JPEG Marker” in Presentation Object Subsets for AFP . YCrCb. A three-component color space that approximately models how color is interpreted by the human visual system, with an intensity value and two color values. YCbCr and YCrCb use the same three values, but in a different order . Y p extent. The size of a presentation space or logical page in the Y p dimension. See also presentation space and logical page. Yxy color space. A color space belonging to the XYZ base family that expresses the XYZ values in terms of x and y chromaticity coordinates, somewhat analogous to the hue and saturation coordinates of the HSV color space. X g ,Y g coordinate system • Yxy color space
PTOCA-C-142	Copyright © AFP Consortium 1997, 2025 223 Index A Absolute Move Baseline (AMB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49 Absolute Move Inline (AMI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51 AFPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii AMB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49 AMI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51 B Begin Line (BLN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53 Begin Suppression (BSU) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .54 BITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv BLN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53 BSU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .54 C chaining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 36, 46 CHAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv character escapement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15 CODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv coded font . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46 color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 30–31, 90, 102, 121, 140, 143 complex text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18–20 control sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7, 9, 16, 25, 27–29, 36, 1 12 control sequence (specific) Absolute Move Baseline, AMB . . . . . . . . . . . 21, 41, 49, 77, 1 12, 120 Absolute Move Inline, AMI . . . . 21–22, 24, 51, 60, 74–75, 82, 96– 97, 1 15, 1 17, 142 Begin Line, BLN . . . .21, 23, 30–31, 41, 53, 60, 77, 82, 84, 96–97, 99, 1 12, 1 15, 120, 139, 142, 155, 157, 159 Begin Suppression, BSU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21, 54, 63, 174 Draw B-axis Rule, DBR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 56 Draw I-axis Rule, DIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 58 Encrypted Data, ENC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22–24, 60–62, 88, 100 Encryption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20 End Suppression, ESU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 54, 63, 174 Glyph Advance Run, GAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19–20, 22, 64–65, 67 Glyph ID Run, GIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19–20, 22, 64–65, 67 Glyph Layout Control, GLC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 22, 64–66 Glyph Offset Run, GOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19–20, 22, 64–65, 67 No Operation, NOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 73, 155, 157, 159 Overstrike, OVS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 74 Relative Move Baseline, RMB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 77–78, 1 12, 120 Relative Move Inline, RMI . . . . . . 22–24, 60, 74–75, 80, 82, 96–97, 1 15, 1 17, 142
PTOCA-C-143	Repeat String, RPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 46, 82, 155, 157, 159 Set Baseline Increment, SBI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21, 23, 30, 84, 139 Set Coded Font Local, SCFL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 30, 77, 86 Set Encrypted Alternate, SEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 61, 88 Set Extended Text Color , SEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 90 Set Inline Margin, SIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 31, 37, 99 Set Intercharacter Adjustment, SIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23, 31, 96 Set Key Information, SKI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 61, 88, 100–101 Set Text Color , STC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 102 Set Text Orientation, STO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 31, 46, 105, 137 Set V ariable Space Character Increment, SVI . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 108 T emporary Baseline Move, TBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 76–77, 1 10, 120 T ransparent Data, TRN . . . . . . . . 23–24, 46, 82, 1 15, 155, 157, 159 Underscore, USC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 1 17 Unicode Complex Text, UCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 20, 25, 64, 67, 122 conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47 coordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 10, 24, 40, 46, 105 D data stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 9, 143, 165, 169 data types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34 DBR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .56 default . . . . 33–34, 49, 51, 54, 56, 58, 60, 63, 74, 78, 80, 82, 84, 86, 88, 90, 96, 99, 102, 105, 108, 1 10, 1 15, 1 17, 139, 141–143 default hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35 default indicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38 DIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58 Draw B-axis Rule (DBR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .56 Draw I-axis Rule (DIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58 E ENC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .60 Encrypted Data (ENC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .60 End Suppression (ESU) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .63 ESU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .63 exception condition . . . . . . . . . . . 10, 16, 34, 41, 76, 145, 148, 167, 171 exception condition code (specific) EC-0001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39, 45, 148, 172 EC-0103 . . . . . 41, 45, 49–52, 57, 59, 61–62, 78–81, 83, 1 14–1 16, 138, 148, 172 EC-0201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55, 148, 172 EC-0401 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55, 148, 172 EC-0505 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136, 138, 148, 172 EC-0601 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54, 148, 172 EC-0605 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137–138, 148, 172 EC-0705 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137–138, 148, 172 EC-0C01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86–87, 139–140, 148, 172 EC-0E02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90, 95, 140, 148, 172 EC-0E03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90, 95, 140, 148, 172 EC-0E04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90, 95, 140, 148, 172 EC-0E05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90, 95, 140, 148, 172 EC-0F01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106–107, 149, 172 EC-1001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99, 141–142, 149, 172 EC-1 101 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84–85, 139, 149, 172 EC-1201 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .97–98, 142, 149, 172 EC-1301 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50, 149, 172 EC-1401 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49, 51, 149, 172 EC-1403 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49–50, 79, 149, 172 EC-1501 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80–81, 149, 172 EC-1601 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78–79, 149, 172 EC-1701 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108, 149, 172 EC-1802 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .86–87, 140, 149, 172 EC-1901 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83, 149, 172 EC-1A01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61–62, 82–83, 1 16, 128, 149, 172 EC-1A03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61–62, 83, 1 16, 128–129, 150, 172 EC-1B01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82–83, 150, 172 EC-1C01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39, 45, 150, 172 EC-1E01 . . . 39, 45, 47, 56–59, 61–62, 86–87, 89, 99–101, 106– 109, 150, 172 EC-1F01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83, 150, 172 EC-2100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40, 45, 77, 150, 172 EC-3F02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77, 87, 140, 150, 172 EC-5803 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104, 143, 150, 172 EC-6802 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144, 150, 173 EC-6803 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144 EC-6902 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144, 150, 173 EC-6A02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141, 150, 173 EC-6B02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141, 150, 173 EC-8002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56–59, 150, 173 EC-8202 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56–59, 151, 173 EC-9601 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55
PTOCA-C-144	PTOCA Reference
PTOCA-C-145	EC-9801 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54–55, 63, 151, 173 EC-9803 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 1, 1 13, 151, 173 EC-9A01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76–77, 151, 173 EC-9B01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128–129, 151, 173 EC-9C00 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69 EC-9C01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69 EC-9C02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .65 EC-9C03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64–65, 69, 71 EC-9C06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64–65, 71 EC-9C08 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64, 71 EC-9C09 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 EC-9C0A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 EC-9C0B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 EC-9D01 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61–62, 100–101, 151, 173 EC-9D02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61–62, 151, 173 EC-9D03 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61, 151, 173 F font . . 17, 21, 23–24, 30, 40, 65, 67, 76, 82, 86, 108–109, 1 15, 1 19, 122, 139 G GAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64, 71 GIR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65, 67, 71 GLC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66–67, 71 Glyph Advance Run (GAR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64 Glyph ID Run (GIR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .65 Glyph Layout Control (GLC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .66 GOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .71 graphic character placement . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 9, 14–15, 40–42, 46, 96 H hierarchy . . . . 9–10, 21, 33–34, 56, 58, 84, 86, 90, 96, 99, 102, 108, 1 10, 1 17, 141–143
PTOCA-C-146	I initial measurement unit parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136 initial size parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 initial text condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29, 136 initial text condition (specific) Baseline Increment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 139, 165 Coded Font Local ID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 139, 165 Extended Text Color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 140 Initial Baseline Coordinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 141, 165 Initial Inline Coordinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 141, 165 Inline Margin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 141, 165 Intercharacter Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 142, 165 Text Color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 143, 165 Text Orientation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 143, 165 initial text condition parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139 M measurement . . . . 12–13, 21, 34, 47, 49, 51, 56, 58, 63–64, 66, 74, 78, 80, 84, 96, 99, 105, 108, 1 10, 1 17, 124, 154, 157, 159 metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 migration functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 modal control sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37 N nesting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 24, 54, 1 19 No Operation (NOP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73 NOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73 O obsolete functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 17, 46, 87, 105, 139, 143 overflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34 overrun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40 Overstrike (OVS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74 OVS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74 P parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27–29, 33, 35, 136, 154 parameter (specific) alternate text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62, 88 B-axis orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 105, 137, 143, 165 baseline displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .49 baseline increment . . . . . . . . . . 16, 21, 30, 53, 78, 84, 1 10, 139, 165 Bidi layout processing control . . . . . . . 28, 124, 126–129, 132–133, 151 bypass identifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22, 24, 74, 1 17 encrypted data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60, 88 extent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29, 137 foreground color . . . . . . 23–24, 30–31, 90, 102, 140, 143, 165, 170 foreground color precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 102, 165, 170 glyph advance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64, 160 glyph advance along current baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 66–67, 160 glyph font name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 28, 66–67, 70, 160 glyph ID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 65, 160 glyph length of font name. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 66–67, 70, 160 glyph length of object identifier for font. . . . . . . . 28, 66–67, 70, 160 glyph object identifier for font . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 28, 66–67, 160 glyph offset from current baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 71, 160 I-axis orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31, 105, 137, 143, 165 ignored data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73 initial baseline coordinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 141, 165 initial inline coordinate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 141, 165 inline displacement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51, 99 inline increment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .80 inline margin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 21, 31, 46, 53, 99, 141, 165 intercharacter adjustment . . . 15, 23, 31, 40, 46, 87, 96, 140, 142, 165 intercharacter adjustment direction . . . . 23, 31, 96, 142, 165, 170 key information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88, 100 local identifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21, 23, 30, 54, 63, 86, 139, 165, 174 overstrike character . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74 repeat length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82 repeated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82 rule length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56, 58 rule width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56, 58, 154, 157, 159 suppression identifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54, 63 temporary baseline direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 1 10 temporary baseline increment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 1 10 temporary baseline precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 10 transparent data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 15 Unicode alternate current inline position . . . . . . . . 28, 124, 126–127 Unicode control flags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 123, 125–126 Unicode data length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 123, 125–126, 128, 151 Unicode glyph processing control . . . . . . . . . 28, 124, 127–129, 151 Unicode version level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28, 123, 125, 128–129, 151 unit base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 29, 136 units per unit base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 29, 136 variable space character increment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24, 108
PTOCA-C-147	PTOCA Reference 225 parameter default hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35 parameter specification hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .35 precision parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 Presentation Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 presentation environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Presentation Text data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 21, 40, 46, 163, 166 Presentation Text Data Descriptor . . . . . . 7, 9, 12, 19, 21, 29–30, 33, 37–38, 40, 46, 84–85, 136, 140, 163–164, 170 Presentation Text object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 9, 33, 37 Presentation Text object space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 9–10, 24 PTOCA PT1 compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154 PTOCA PT2 compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156 PTOCA PT3 compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158 PTOCA PT4 compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160 R Relative Move Baseline (RMB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .78 Relative Move Inline (RMI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .80 Repeat String (RPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82 reserved fields. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47 retired functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 retired parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177 RMB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .78 RMI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .80 rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 17, 77, 86, 105 RPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82 S SBI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84 SBIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv SCFL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .86 scope of text object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 37 SEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .88 SEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .90 Set Baseline Increment (SBI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84 Set Coded Font Local (SCFL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .86 Set Encrypted Alternate (SEA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .88 Set Extended Text Color (SEC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .90 Set Inline Margin (SIM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .99 Set Intercharacter Adjustment (SIA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .96 Set Key Information (SKI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100 Set Text Color (STC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 Set Text Orientation (STO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 Set V ariable Space Character Increment (SVI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 SIA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .96 SIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .99 SKI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100 standard action value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47 standard actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147 STC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 STO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 subset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10, 153 suppression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 21, 54, 63, 167, 174 SVI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 syntax diagrams BITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv CHAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv CODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv how to read . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv SBIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv UBIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv UNDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv T TBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 10 T emporary Baseline Move (TBM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 10 text major . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 37, 109, 138, 165, 169 text object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 37, 138, 169–170 trademarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii, 180 T ransparent Data (TRN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 15 TRN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 15 U UBIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv UCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71, 122 Underscore (USC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 17 UNDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv Unicode Complex Text (UCT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 UP³I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220 USC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 17
PTOCA-C-148	Advanced Function Presentation Consortium Presentation Text Object Content Architecture ReferenceAFPC-0009-04
